TITLE: Blueberry Cookies - Lane & Grey Fare
AUTHOR: Lane & Grey Fare
SOURCE URL: https://laneandgreyfare.com/blueberry-cookies/
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-12
PARAGRAPH COUNT: 1
======================================================================

[¶1] These Blueberry Cookies are are soft and chewy eggless sugar cookies that are made with real frozen blueberries! They're soft and chewy in the middle and crunchy on the edges; the perfect combo! Best yet, their beautiful periwinkle color is completely natural and they're gluten free, nut free and easily vegan!!! Unlike many eggless cookies that go stale very quickly, these periwinkle beauties stay soft for days! These blueberry cookies could not be more gorgeous! If you're a blueberry lover, these blue cookies are for you! They have a mild blueberry flavor throughout while still tasting like my Small Batch Sugar Cookies! Thanks to all the moisture from the frozen blueberries, these beauties stay soft for days! They're fun and festive for summer like my 4th of July Sugar Cookies, but also perfect for any time of the year! For more sugar cookie recipes, try my super popular Sprinkle Sugar Cookies, my Chocolate Chip Sugar Cookies, my Lemon Sugar Cookies and my Strawberry Sugar Cookies. Reasons to Love these Cookies - Allergy Friendly- These cookies are gluten free, nut free, egg free and can easily be dairy free (vegan)! - Soft & Chewy- These cookies are the most perfect texture like our Orange Cookies. - Covered in Sugar- The sugar coating gives a nice sweetness just like with our Fruity Pebbles Cookies! - They're Periwinkle!- The frozen blueberries give the cookies a gorgeous natural periwinkle color and a mild blueberry flavor! Ingredient Notes - Gluten Free Flour- If you also have nut allergies, make sure to use a brand that’s made in a nut free facility. I really love to use Cup4Cup Multipurpose Flour because it’s free of the top 9 allergens. It also contains xanthan gum which really helps give baked goods their bounce and prevents them from falling apart. Since all multipurpose gf flours are not the same, if you use a different gluten free flour, please understand the results will most likely be different. - Cornstarch- This little bit of cornstarch mixed into the flour prevents the cookies from spreading. Without it, the cookies will spread out when baking. - Milk- If there are no dairy allergies or if you’re not vegan, you can use regular whole milk. For non-dairy, use a dairy-free milk of your choosing. - Unsalted Butter or Vegan Baking Sticks- Don’t use melted; the cookies will spread into a giant mess. - Cornstarch and Water- These cookies have no egg so this mixture helps bind everything together like with my Crispy Sugar Cookies. - Blueberries- Like with my Chocolate Chip Blueberry Cookies, I prefer to use frozen because they break down faster in the microwave due to the added moisture. See my recipe card below for a complete list of the ingredients with measurements. Substitutions and Variations How to Make these Vegan - Use a gluten free flour that’s free from dairy. - Make sure the brand of sugar you use is vegan. - Use vegan baking sticks instead of butter. - Only use a non dairy milk of choice. Make this Recipe with All Purpose Flour - Use 2 packed cups of regular flour (336 grams). - Only use 1 tablespoon of milk. - You still need to chill the dough due to the lack of eggs. How to Make Smaller Cookies - Use a small cookie scoop or roll the dough into 1 inch balls. - Bake the cookies at the same temperature but for 13 minutes. Reshape as needed. Should make 24 cookies. This recipe has not been tested with these substitutions and/or variations due to celiac disease and food allergies. If you change any of the ingredients, please let us know how the recipe turned out in the comments below! How to make Blueberry Cookies Here are the step by step instructions to make these blue cookies! Step 1: Heat the Frozen Blueberries Heat the frozen blueberries in a microwave 20 second increments, stirring after each time, until they are soft, liquidy and jammy. About 2-2.5 minutes. Set aside to cool. They will thicken more as they cool. Step 2: Whisk Together the Dry Ingredients In a large bowl, whisk together the gluten free flour, baking powder, 1.5 tablespoons of cornstarch and salt. Set aside. Step 3: Make the Cornstarch Water In a small bowl, using a spoon, mix together the remaining cornstarch with the water until thin and watery. It will be thick and tacky at first. Step 4: Cream the Sugar Beat the butter and sugar until soft and creamy. About 2-3 minutes. Step 5: Add in the other Wet Ingredients Slowly beat the cornstarch water mixture, milk and the 3 tablespoons of the cooled jammy blueberries into the creamed butter and sugar. It will look magenta and chunky. Step 6: Add in the Dry Ingredients and Chill the Dough Slowly beat in the gluten free flour mixture a little at a time until just combined. The dough will be super sticky and lavender. Keep the dough in the bowl, cover the top with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 2.5 hours. If you chill the dough overnight, it will turn blue instead of lavender with blue flecks. Step 7: Scoop the Dough and Coat with Sugar Using a large cookie scoop, make 12 scoops with the dough. Roll each dough ball in the extra granulated sugar to coat completely. Step 8: Bake the Cookies and Cool Place dough balls about 3-4 inches apart on the parchment lined baking sheet. Bake the cookies at 325 degrees Fahrenheit for 15 minutes. Immediately reshape the cookies when they come out of the oven and let cool on the baking sheet for 5 min before transferring to a cooling rack. Expert Baking Tips - Use Packed Cups of Flour- Normally in baking we do not use packed cups however, when working with gluten free, I've found using packed cups works best to help the baked goods keep their shape. For this recipe make sure to use packed cups or please read the gram amount. - Use Room Temperature Butter- Do not use softened or melted butter/vegan baking sticks. The cookies will spread out when baking into a giant mess. - Let the Blueberries Cool- Make sure to make the jammy blueberries first so that they have time to chill. You do not want to add hot blueberries into the dough. It will make it way too wet. In addition, the jammy blueberries thicken as they cool. - Do Not Add Vanilla- Adding vanilla turns the dough a grey color instead of lavender. - Chill the Dough- If you don’t chill the dough for at least 2.5 hours, the cookies will spread and be flat and thin. But, if you chill the dough overnight, it will turn blue instead of lavender with blue flecks. - Wash the Cookie Scoop- If you notice the dough getting stuck in the cookie scoop, wash and dry your scoop halfway through making the dough balls. - Reshape the Cookies- If you want your cookies nice and round, reshape them as soon as they come out of the oven. Use a spatula to push them back into a circle shape. Recipe FAQs Can I make the dough ahead of time? You can, however, it will change color the longer the dough chills. Instead of being a lavender with flecks of blue, it will eventually turn completely blue. If making the dough the night before, keep it shaped in a disc, wrapped in plastic and place in a zip top bag. If doing this, there is no need to chill it again, prior to baking. Or you can freeze the dough for up to 30 days. Thaw the dough in the fridge the night prior to using. Can I make these cookies ahead of time? Yes! Most gluten free baked goods are best made the same day, but you can make these cookies a day before! Unlike most gluten free/eggless cookies, they’re actually so soft they stay fresh for several days! My cookies aren't the same color as yours; what happened? That is because no food coloring is required to get that amazing hue; it's all natural so the color will be different every time. The color of the cookies will vary depending on what brand of blueberries you use to make them, how ripe they are and if you used fresh or frozen. The color is never 100 percent the same, which makes it so fun. For example, in my Blueberry Cupcakes I used fresh blueberries to make the jam and the frosting came more purple. In my Chocolate Blueberry Cake, I used frozen blueberries to make the jam and it came more magenta. I used organic wild frozen blueberries to get this periwinkle color. How do I store these Blueberry Cookies? Once the cookies have cooled, store them in an airtight container at room temperature for up to 3 days. Other Blueberry Recipes You'll Love Did you try this recipe? Please leave me a ⭐ review below! Don’t forget to tag me on Instagram @laneandgreyfare and follow along on Pinterest, Facebook and YouTube! Enjoy!!! 📖 Recipe Blueberry Cookies Ingredients - 1 cup frozen blueberries - 2 cups multipurpose gluten free flour (I use Cup4Cup gluten free multipurpose flour which contains xanthan gum) - 1 ½ tablespoons cornstarch - 1 ½ teaspoons baking powder - ½ teaspoon kosher salt - 2 heaping tablespoons cornstarch mixed with 3 tablespoons water - ½ cup unsalted butter or vegan baking stick, room temperature - 1 ¼ cups plus 2 tablespoons of granulated sugar (keep the 2 tablespoons separate for rolling) - 2 tablespoons milk Instructions - In a medium microwave safe bowl, heat the 1 cup of frozen blueberries in 20 second increments, stirring after each time, until they are soft, liquidy and jammy. This took me about 2-2.5 minutes. Set aside to cool. They will thicken more as they cool. - In a large bowl, whisk together the 2 cups multipurpose gluten free flour, 1.5 tablespoons of cornstarch, the 1.5 teaspoons baking powder and the ½ teaspoon of kosher salt. Set aside. - In a small bowl, using a spoon, mix together the remaining 2 heaping tablespoons of cornstarch with the 3 tablespoons of water until thin and watery. It will be thick and tacky at first. - In a large bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, beat the ½ cup unsalted butter or vegan baking stick and 1 ¼ cups of granulated sugar until soft and creamy. About 2-3 minutes. - Slowly beat the cornstarch water mixture, 2 tablespoons of milk, 3 tablespoons of the cooled jammy blueberries (you may have some left over) into the creamed butter and sugar. It will look magenta and chunky. - Slowly beat in the gluten free flour mixture a little at a time until just combined. The dough will be super sticky and lavender. Keep the dough in the bowl, cover the top with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 2.5 hours. You must not skip this step or the cookies will spread everywhere. If you chill the dough overnight but it will turn blue instead of lavender with blue flecks. - After 2.5 hours, preheat the oven to 325 degrees Fahrenheit. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Set aside. - After the 2.5 hours, using a large cookie scoop, make 12 scoops with the dough. (I use a 2 ounce cookie scoop).If the dough is sticking to the cookie scoop, wash the scoop half way through to get off any stuck on dough.Roll each dough ball in the extra 2 tablespoons of granulated sugar to coat completely. - Place dough balls about 3-4 inches apart on the parchment lined baking sheet. Bake the cookies at 325 degrees Fahrenheit for 15 minutes. Store extra dough balls in the fridge while the rest are baking if they don't all fit. I only bake 6 at a time. - Immediately reshape the cookies when they come out of the oven by using a spatula to push them into a circle shape and let cool on the baking sheet for 5 min before transferring to a cooling rack. If you don't do this, the cookies will break apart into a giant mess.Repeat this with the remaining dough balls.
