TITLE: Lemon Blueberry Cookies - Lane & Grey Fare
AUTHOR: Lane & Grey Fare
SOURCE URL: https://laneandgreyfare.com/lemon-blueberry-cookies/
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-12
PARAGRAPH COUNT: 1
======================================================================

[¶1] These Lemon Blueberry Cookies are soft, chewy, sweet and tangy. This eggless sugar cookie recipe is made with lemon zest, lemon juice and frozen wild blueberries, which gives them that lavender hue! For extra tang the dough balls are rolled into lemon sugar prior to baking making them utter perfection. Drizzled with a gorgeous magenta blueberry glaze, these colors are all natural! Best yet, these cookies also gluten free, nut free and can easily be vegan! The outside of these Lemon Blueberry Cookies has a slight crunch thanks to the lemon infused sugar and the inside is soft and chewy! Like with my Lemon Blueberry Cupcakes, the lemon flavor isn't overpowering thanks to the sweetness from the blueberries; the flavors blend beautifully together! You don't have to add the blueberry drizzle but I think it gives these cookies something extra special! Thanks to all the moisture from the fruit, these beauties stay soft for days like my Strawberry Sugar Cookies! For more sugar cookie recipes, try my super popular Sprinkle Sugar Cookies, my Chocolate Chip Sugar Cookies, my Lemon Sugar Cookies and my Blueberry Cookies. Reasons to Love These Lemon Blueberry Cookies - Allergy Friendly- These cookies are gluten free, nut free, egg free and can easily be dairy free (vegan)! - Soft & Chewy- The inside of these cookies have the most perfect texture. - Covered in Lemon Sugar- The lemon sugar coating helps bring out that lemon flavor and gives the outside a nice crunch! - Real Lemon Juice- The juice from the lemons gives the cookies this gorgeous yet mild tang like in my Lemon Buttercream Frosting! - Blueberry Glaze- This glaze gives the cookies a lovely sweetness and a stunning color like in our Blueberry Crumb Cake! - The Stunning Purple Color- These beauties have a gorgeous marbled lavender hue and the magenta glaze is just perfection and all natural! Ingredient Notes - Gluten Free Flour- If you also have nut allergies, make sure to use a brand that’s made in a nut free facility. I really love to use Cup4Cup Multipurpose Flour because it’s free of the top 9 allergens. It also contains xanthan gum which really helps give baked goods their bounce and prevents them from falling apart. Since all multipurpose gf flours are not the same, if you use a different gluten free flour, please understand the results will most likely be different. - Milk- If there are no dairy allergies or if you’re not vegan, you can use regular whole milk. For non-dairy, use a dairy-free milk of your choosing. - Unsalted Butter or Vegan Baking Sticks- Don’t use melted; the cookies will spread into a giant mess. - Cornstarch and Water- These cookies have no egg so this mixture helps bind everything together. - Lemons- Please only use fresh squeezed lemon juice. Prepackaged lemon juice can result in the cookies having a chemical taste. We need a total of 3 medium lemons for the juice and zest combined. - Blueberries- Like with my Chocolate Chip Blueberry Cookies, I prefer to use frozen wild blueberries because they make the cookies a lovely lavender shade. You can use regular size frozen blueberries, but the cookies will stay a pale yellow and be soft and fluffy versus soft and chewy. They're still delicious! See my recipe card below for a complete list of the ingredients with measurements. Substitutions and Variations How to Make these into Vegan Cookies - Use a gluten free flour that’s free from dairy. - Make sure the brand of sugar you use is vegan. - Use vegan baking sticks instead of butter. - Only use a non-dairy milk of choice. Make this Recipe with All Purpose Flour - Use 2 packed cups of regular flour (336 grams). - You still need to chill the dough due to the lack of eggs. For Smaller Cookies - Use a small cookie scoop or roll the dough into 1 inch balls. - Bake the cookies at the same temperature but for 12-13 minutes. Reshape as needed. Should make 22 cookies. Cookies with Regular Frozen Blueberries - Use ¾ cup frozen regular size blueberries. - Press a few blueberries into the tops of the cookies prior to rolling in the lemon sugar if desired. - Bake the cookies for 13-15 minutes. - Do not leave the dough in the fridge overnight as it will become super wet due to the moisture from the blueberries. The images below are what the cookies will look like with the frozen regular size blueberries. This recipe has not been tested with some of these substitutions and/or variations due to celiac disease and food allergies. If you change any of the ingredients, please let us know how the recipe turned out in the comments below! How to Make Lemon Blueberry Cookies Here are the step by step instructions to make these blueberry lemon cookies! Step 1: Zest the Lemons Wash and dry all 3 lemons. Zest all 3 lemons. Put the zest in a little bowl and cover with plastic wrap so it doesn't get crunchy. Set aside. Step 2: Juice the Lemons Juice one lemon and remove any seeds if they get in the juice. Set aside. There should be about 2 tablespoons of juice. If there isn't enough, juice another lemon. Step 3: Make the Blueberry Jam In a medium microwave safe bowl, heat the frozen blueberries in 20 second increments, stirring after each time, until they are soft, liquidy and jammy. Set aside to cool. They will thicken more as they cool. Step 4: Whisk Together the Dry Ingredients In a large bowl, whisk together the gluten free flour, baking powder and salt. Set aside. Step 5: Make the Cornstarch Water In a small bowl, using a spoon, mix together the cornstarch and water until thin and watery. It will be thick and tacky at first. Step 6: Cream the Butter and Sugar Beat the butter and sugar until it is soft and creamy. About 2-3 minutes. Step 7: Add in the other Wet Ingredients Slowly beat the cornstarch water mixture, milk, lemon zest and lemon juice into the creamed butter and sugar. It will look pale yellow and chunky. Step 8: Add in the Dry Ingredients, Blueberries and Chill the Dough Slowly beat in the gluten free flour mixture a little at a time until just combined. Gently using a spatula, fold in the frozen blueberries. The dough will become a lovely purple color. Refrigerate for 1 hour. Step 9: Make the Lemon Sugar Whisk together the granulated sugar and the lemon zest until completely combined. Step 10: Scoop the Dough and Coat with the Lemon Sugar Using a large cookie scoop (I use a 2 ounce cookie scoop), scoop the dough out into 11 scoops. Coat each dough ball in the lemon sugar. Step 11: Bake the Cookies and Cool Bake the cookies at 325 degrees Fahrenheit for 15 minutes. Then immediately reshape the cookies when they come out of the oven by using a spatula to push them into a circle shape and let cool on the baking sheet for 5 min before transferring to a cooling rack. If you don't do this, the cookies will break apart into a giant mess. Step 12: Make The Glaze In a small bowl, whisk together the confectioners' sugar, the cooled blueberry jam and the water until combined and smooth. Step 13: Drizzle The Glaze Lastly, drizzle the blueberry glaze on top of the cool cookies. If you drizzle it on warm cookies, the glaze with melt. Let the glaze harden. Expert Baking Tips - Use Packed Cups of Flour- Normally in baking we do not use packed cups however, when working with gluten free, I've found using packed cups works best to help the baked goods keep their shape. - Use Room Temperature Butter- Do not use softened or melted butter/vegan baking sticks. The cookies will spread out when baking into a giant mess. - Use Real Lemons- This is to prevent the cookies from having a chemical taste. - Keep the Lemon Zest Airtight- If you leave it uncovered and not in a bowl covered in plastic wrap while you bake, it will dry out and become crunchy. - Do not use Fresh Blueberries- Using fresh makes the dough way too wet and causes the cookies to spread out everywhere. - Chill the Dough- If you don’t chill the dough for at least 1 hour, the cookies will spread and be flat and thin. - Reshape the Cookies- If you want your cookies nice and round, reshape them as soon as they come out of the oven. Use a spatula to push them back into a circle shape. - Do not Chill the Dough Overnight- The dough will become way too wet due to the frozen blueberries and will develop a slimy texture. - Making The Glaze- If the glaze appears too watery, add more confectioners’ sugar 1 tablespoon at a time. If it appears too thick, add more water ¼ teaspoon at a time. You want the glaze thin enough to drizzle but thick enough to solidify on the cookies. Recipe FAQs Can I make the dough ahead of time? You can make the dough balls ahead of time and then freeze them. Let them come to almost room temperature before rolling them in the lemon sugar and baking. If doing this, there is no need to chill it again, prior to baking. Can I make these cookies ahead of time? Most gluten free baked goods are best made the same day, but you can make these cookies a day before! Unlike most gluten free cookies, they’re actually so soft they stay fresh for several days but they must be stored in the fridge. My cookies aren't the same color as yours, what happened? That is because no food coloring is required to get that amazing hue; it's all natural so the color will be different every time. The color of the cookies will vary depending on what type of blueberries you use to make them. The color is never 100 percent the same, which makes it so fun. To make them that lavender color, use the organic wild frozen blueberries as I did. Using regular size frozen blueberries will keep the dough more of the pale yellow. How do I store these Lemon Blueberry Cookies? Once the glaze has hardened, store the cookies in an airtight container in the fridge for up to 3 days. Do not leave them at room temperature as they get very wet due to the blueberries. They're still soft when in the fridge but you can leave let them come to room temperature before eating if desired. More Lemon and Blueberry Recipes You'll Love Did you try this recipe? Please leave me a ⭐ review below! Don’t forget to tag me on Instagram @laneandgreyfare and follow along on Pinterest, Facebook and YouTube! Enjoy!!! 📖 Recipe Lemon Blueberry Cookies Ingredients For the Cookies - 2 cups multipurpose gluten free flour (I use Cup4Cup gluten free multipurpose flour which contains xanthan gum) - 1.5 teaspoons baking powder - ½ teaspoon kosher salt - ½ cup unsalted butter , room temperature - 1 ¼ cups granulated sugar - 2 rounded tablespoons cornstarch mixed with 3 tablespoons water - 3 tablespoons milk - 2 tablespoons fresh squeezed lemon juice (from about 1 medium lemon) - 1 tablespoon lemon zest (from about 2 medium lemons) - 1 cup frozen wild blueberries For the Lemon Sugar - 3 tablespoons granulated sugar - 1 teaspoon lemon zest (from about 1 medium lemon) For the Glaze - 1 cup confectioners' sugar - 1 tablespoon blueberry jam - 1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon water Instructions Make the Blueberry Jam (If Making the Glaze) - In a medium microwave safe bowl, heat ½ cup of the frozen blueberries in 20 second increments, stirring after each time, until they are soft, liquidy and jammy. This took me about 2-2.5 minutes. Set aside to cool. They will thicken more as they cool. Make the Cookies - Wash and dry all 3 lemons. Take a zester and zest all 3 lemons. Put the zest in a little bowl and cover with plastic wrap so it doesn't get crunchy. Set aside. - Take one lemon, cut it in half and juice it. Make sure to remove any seeds if they get in the juice. Set aside. There should be about 2 tablespoons of juice. If there isn't enough, juice another lemon. - In a large bowl, whisk together the 2 cups of multipurpose gluten free flour, 1.5 teaspoons baking powder and ½ teaspoon kosher salt. Set aside. - In a small bowl, using a spoon, mix together the 2 rounded tablespoons of cornstarch with 3 tablespoons of water until thin and watery. It will be thick and tacky at first. - In a large bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, beat the ½ cup unsalted butter or vegan baking stick and 1 ¼ cups of the sugar until it is soft and creamy. About 2-3 minutes. - Slowly beat the cornstarch water mixture, 3 tablespoons milk, 1 tablespoon of lemon zest and the 2 tablespoons of lemon juice into the creamed butter and sugar. It will look pale yellow and chunky. - Slowly beat in the gluten free flour mixture a little at a time until just combined. - Gently using a spatula, fold in the remaining ½ cup frozen wild blueberries. The dough will turn a lovely purple. - Keep the dough in the bowl, cover the top with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 1 hour. You must not skip this step or the cookies will spread everywhere. - After 1 hour, preheat the oven to 325 degrees Fahrenheit. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Set aside. - After 1 hour using a large cookie scoop, make 11 scoops with the dough. (I use a 2 ounce cookie scoop). - In a small bowl, whisk together the remaining 3 tablespoons of granulated sugar and the remaining 1 teaspoon of lemon zest. Mix until completely combined. - Roll each dough ball in the lemon sugar mixture to coat completely. - Place dough balls about 3-4 inches apart on the parchment lined baking sheet. Bake the cookies at 325 degrees Fahrenheit for 15 minutes. Store extra dough balls in the fridge while the rest are baking if they don't all fit. I only bake 6 at a time. - Immediately reshape the cookies when they come out of the oven. Use a spatula to push them into a circle.Let them cool on the baking sheet for 5 min before transferring to a cooling rack. If you don't do this, the cookies will break apart into a giant mess.Let the cookies cool completely before adding the blueberry glaze, otherwise the glaze will turn into a liquid mess. Make the Glaze - In a small bowl, whisk together the 1 cup confectioners' sugar, 1 tablespoon of the cooled blueberry jam and the 1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon water until combined and smooth. - Drizzle the blueberry glaze on top of the cool cookies. If you drizzle it on warm cookies, the glaze with melt. Let the glaze harden.
