TITLE: Why modern fitness culture misunderstands human bodies | Daniel Lieberman
VIDEO ID: -8cPMuMm2BE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-8cPMuMm2BE
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-01-22
DURATION: 18:51
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] So the word exercise um you know comes from the Latin exorcisio um and um and it meant you know to train to um so we still do math exercises or or soldiers do exercises to get fit but uh eventually the the term has changed its meaning and it's it's developed new meanings. So one on one hand it means to uh to do voluntary physical activity for the sake of health and fitness. That's the kind of sort of fitness physical activity kind of exercise. But then on the other hand, it's also means you know to be exercised to means to be upset, to be confused, to be anxious, to be kind of worried. You know, we get exercised by our math exercises, right? You know, and and so uh to me it's you know, it's part and parcel of this strange concept of exercise, right? that we it's this modern idea of of doing voluntary discretionary physical activity for the sake of health and fitness, but we don't do it often. You know, most people don't do it because they they want to. They do it because, you know, it helps stave off

[01:00] death and decrepitude and and and and in the modern world, of course, a lot of people are confused about it and because they find it hard to do. They're not quite sure how much to do. There are all kinds of myths surrounding it. So very much people are exercised about exercise today and in and and really I think that by uh shining the light of evolution and and and using kind of an anthropological perspective, my goal really is to help people be less exercised about exercise, >> how evolution made us move. I would say that the definition I use of exercise is the pretty much the bog standard definition that that people in the in the sort of fitness med exercise science world use. It's important to make a distinction between physical activity and exercise. So physical activity is just moving, right? When you you do anything, right? You go go shop and you know pick up your groceries and take them to your car, that's physical activity. When you you know sweep the kitchen floor, that's physical activity. But exercise is is discretionary

[02:01] voluntary physical activity for the sake of of health and fitness. So it can include everything from sports to to running on a treadmill to you know going for a walk. I think the paradox of exercise is that everybody knows it's good for them. I I I don't know that really anyone who says they don't want to ever exercise, right? Um and but the paradox is that most things that are good for us kind of want to do, you know, uh but exercise is is is kind of the reverse, right? It's something that we all know we want to do. It's good for us and yet a lot of us have a hard time doing it. And you know the the proof is you know in the in the in the data uh according to u the CDC um only about 20% of Americans get the very minimum levels of exercise that every health organization in the world thinks is the minimum for for for for an adult which is 150 minutes a week. So so 80% of us really struggle and fail to get the very basic amounts of exercise but almost everyone says that they want to get enough exercise. The most common reason

[03:03] that people don't like to do exercise that they when you ask them is that they don't have time. You know, they find it stressful and they're busy, right? And that's and that's a legitimate uh concern for a lot of people. Imagine if you have to commute a long distance, you have a job that you know is very sedentary. Um you got to, you know, deal with your kids in the evening and, you know, or maybe you have two jobs or or whatever. You know, it's very challenging for people to exercise and to find the time in in in the in the modern world. Um the the other reason that people uh often give for not exercising is they don't like to they they find it uncomfortable. They find it um un unpleasant. They find it um you know they get hot and bothered and and they don't feel like they get much reward out of it. And so uh they you know they they find it's a there's a lot of inertia that prevents people from doing it. They they have a hard time getting off the couch. And um and u and you know I think we need to be compassionate towards both of those reasons, right? because uh yes people are stressed for time and yes it is often unpleasant and unfun and but we're

[04:05] but we make them feel bad about that right we make them feel bad for um for for being stressed we make them feel bad for having that inertia when actually it's completely normal I mean as I you know nobody ever exercised in the stone age right people were physically active when they had to be and they might they might dance or do other sort play you know do other things that were for fun but you know but voluitionally going on five mile run in the morning or going to the gym to lift weights whose sole purpose is to be lifted. That's a really strange weird modern behavior. And there are all kinds of instincts that we have not to do it. And and we shouldn't make people feel bad for having those instincts. Instead, we should help them figure out ways to overcome those instincts because we live in a world where we now because we've mechanized everything, right? We no longer have to be physically active. We now in a very strange way have to choose to be physically active. And that's not so easy. Oh my gosh, there are so many myths about exercise. It's hard to know where to start. But um I would say uh that you know, one myth is that our ancestors were sort of just natural incredible

[05:06] athletes who just get up in bed in the morning and you know run you know ultramarathons at will and without without ever you know you know much stress or difficulty. That our ancestors were really incredibly strong. Um that there's a trade-off between speed and strength. um that um you don't have to, you know, that it's normal to stop be less physically active as you get older, that there's a perfect type of exercise, perfect amount of exercise, um you know, that um that sports equals exercise. Um I could go on. There's, you know, the the the topic of exercise is just laden with myths. A common view about um about our sort of evolutionary origins um and about sort of sort of the the evolution of physical activity is that is that you know we evolved from these kind of super athlete kind of you know ancestors and that and that civilization has sort of contaminated us. So, so if you wear shoes or you drink Gatorade or you have a fancy watch or something like that, somehow that kind of deprivives you of the kind of

[06:07] natural talent that you have. And if only you had been born, you know, in in some little village somewhere and and you know, didn't have TV and didn't have access to all these commercial goods that you'd be a natural incredible athlete and that you could just get out of bed and, you know, run an ultramarathon or something like that. Um, a lot of these myths, to be honest, stem from, I think, the this idea of, you know, this Wussoian idea of of the myth of the noble savage, right? That that that humans uncontamed by civilization are also sort of naturally good and fine. And and they also come from terrible, horrible, racist stereotypes about about, for example, you know, Africans not experiencing pain as much and, you know, Asians having some kind of natural sort of proclivity to sneak around in the dark. You know, you mean we all know these stereotypes and they're they're pernicious and they're and they're wrong and but they've been applied uh in various ways to to uh to hunter gatherers and to you know subsistence farmers in various parts of the world to make us feel that somehow they're like these sort of these kind of basically you know fundamental

[07:08] super athletes and and when you do that not I think you do harm to both uh to to to people all around the planet you do harm to to those populations because you make you kind of dehumanize them. I mean, when they run an ultramarathon, it's just as hard as when when you know, I were to try to run an ultramarathon. They sweat, they toil, they get nausea, they get cramps. They do it because it's not because it's easy for them. They do it because they they value it. They think it's worth doing. And you also make people in the in the West feel terrible, like somehow there's something wrong with them, right? And they should, you know, throw away their shoes and and, you know, um and you know, eat eat a paleo diet or something like that and all of a sudden, tada, they'll become this like amazing athlete. And that's just not true. That's a that's just a myth. And it's so it's pernicious in a in a variety of ways. In 2012, I had the good fortune to be invited to go to the Iron Man World Championships in Kona in Hawaii. It's an amazing event, right? And if you don't know what an Iron Man a full Iron Man triathon's like, you start off with a 2.4 mile open water swim.

[08:08] Then the then the then they then the athletes rush out of the water, jump onto bikes with these like high-tech helmets and stuff like that. They speed off and they do 112 mile bike ride across a desert and then they come back, throw off their bike, get jump off their bikes, and then they do a full marathon in the heat. It's like 90 degrees Fahrenheit, right? And it's really amazing. And the the the elite athletes do this in a little bit over eight hours. They're just like cyborgs. They're not like human beings. It's astonishing to watch. And then people and then the the less lesser athletes, you know, take longer to do and and everybody has to finish by 17 hours. by midnight. And it's really just it's just astonishing to see people put their bodies to that kind of endurance uh to achieve something like that. And I I was really impressed by that. Um I'd never seen a full iron man before. And then just a few weeks later, I was in a very rural part of of Mexico in in in Chihuahua up in the Sierra Tarumara where I got to observe a RA hippie, which is the traditional uh foot race that the that the Taramara Native Americans do. and and it's um it's just

[09:10] a it's kind of like a almost like a soccer game. It's a there are two teams and they have a little ball, a little round ball that's carved out of wood that morning and uh there about five people on each team and they kind of kick the ball with their feet and then chase it and find it and kick it again and chase it and find it, kick it again. There's like a little little circuit they do and there are two teams and whichever team laps the other team wins. and and the race I saw must have been about 40 50 miles long. And so it's another incredible endurance event. And on the on the surface, you'd say, "Oh my god, these events are totally different." Right? Iron Man is very commercial and everybody's wearing the fanciest latest gear and they've got super fancy shoes. They drink, you know, they're using gel and goo and, you know, all kinds of specially formulated, you know, nutrition drinks and their bikes cost like, you know, $10, $20,000. and it's very commercial, right? And they're, you know, speakers and crowds, etc. Whereas, whereas the Tamar when they're running, they're just wearing the clothes that they normally wear. They're running in sandals. It's very

[10:12] uncommercial. And you think, oh my gosh, it's so different. You know, one is more authentic than the other. But if you stop and think, actually, they're very similar, right? Because both involve rewards, right? So Iron Man, there's like, you know, the winner and the winner gets a prize, etc. Well, the Tara also have prizes. They they bet huge amounts of stuff, right? They bet clothes and goats and corn and and stuff like that. They they don't have Gatorade, but they make their own kind of form of Gatorade out of out of corn. It's called um and and they they they cheer on their runners, too. And and um and and you know, there's the joy of victory and the agony of defeat and all that. So, in some ways they're very different, but in other ways it's kind of the same thing, you know, and and and it's it's a personal journey that people undertake. A very small number of them. The vast majority of people are are are are observers. They're not participants. So really it made me realize that oh yes there are some differences between sort of more modern commercialized western forms of endurance physical activity. This is something basic and fundamental that all cultures do and and um and

[11:12] actually I think what makes us similar is is greater than what makes us different. You know, there are different kinds of training, right? You know, play is a form of training in a way, right? You know, children play, right? Because they're they're learning skills. They're developing capacities and and humans are one of the few species, dogs are another um that that continue to play as adults, right? And and that play um helps us, you know, maintain our capacities. It helps us with social relationships. I mean, there's all kinds of good things that happen with play, right? But exercise is kind of very is I wouldn't say exercise is generally play although some play is exercise and and um and when you kind of exercise in order to you know um or train for like an event you're you're doing something um you're spending a lot of energy um you're you're you're doing physical activity kind of to get ready for something right and and c certainly um you know for the kinds of things that we do that again that's a very modern western behavior so when I was in you know, talking to when I've talked to to uh to to Native American runners who participate in

[12:13] these in these in these long-distance races and I asked them how they get ready for their the race, how they train, they would kind of look look at me like like they didn't understand the question. There was, you know, what are you talking about? Like and so, you know, I was working with the translator. The translator was saying, you know, you know, this gringo, you know, he like runs five miles every day to kind of get ready for a race. And, you know, the question that I got was, you know, why would you why would you run if you didn't have to, right? you know that because their life is their training right you know when I ask people there or ask people in Africa in the places where I work you know like when do you run the most common answer I get is oh well to to chase a goat you know that's the most common ances answer I get there are a lot of ways to quantify how physically active somebody is right or um and um a very simple one it's not necessarily the best one but a simple way of doing it is what's called the physical activity level it's just a ratio so it's the total amount of energy you spend in a day divided by the energy you would spend if you were just in you know at bed rest your what's called your

[13:14] basil metabolic rates the energy you spend just taking care of the most basic essential functions of your body and so say if you're if you're in bed rest you know you know in a in a hospital and you know lying in bed with just like a clicker for the for the TV and you're doing absolutely nothing not even digesting food your physical activity level would be about your power physical activity level would be about a 1.2 two and if you're like a torto cyclist it would be above three. If you're a kind of a desk worker it would be like 1.6. So it's kind of a way to to compare individuals but also species because it's standardized by how your body size because your body size essentially determines your basil metabolic rate. And it's interesting that um most animals have physical activity levels of about two to three. So they're you know pretty active. uh we act we evolve from from apes and turns out that primates in general and apes in particular have really low pals really really low physical activity levels chimpanzees have physical activity levels about 1.4 before um and um so their physical activity levels are actually lower than

[14:15] sedentary Americans. So your average sedentary American who doesn't really do much and you know spends most of his or her time on in chairs and you know etc and takes elevators and all that is still more physically active actually than your average chimpanzeee. Whereas uh hunter gathers um people who you know every day have to go out and get their food their physical activity levels tend to be around two two about you know 1.92 ear subsistance farmers who don't have a lot of machines and tractors and stuff like that they're maybe a little bit harder working maybe two two.1 2.2 um and it really it wasn't until the industrial revolution that people's physical activity levels were be able to go back go down like about 25% to you know 1.6 6 1.7 which is sort of typical of your average American. So it's a it's a it's a useful kind of simple standard to help us uh compare just generally how active different different groups or different individuals are. So your basil metabolic rate is a really important number because it's it tells you kind of just how much energy you're spending on just the essential maintenance of your

[15:15] body. you know, paying for your brain and paying for all the tissues in your body and you know, you have to turn over tissues all the time. Like your like the cells in your gut are being replaced like every 5 days or so. I mean, your fingernails are growing. Everything's happening in your body, right? And that all costs energy. And it turns out that a kind of typical say adult male my my size, right? I'm not all that big, but um you know, spends about twothirds of of of his or her physical metabolism just on basil metabolic rate. So, I spend about 1,600 calories a day just just just just existing, you know, um just taking care of my body. Um so, the vast majority of the energy that we spend isn't spent on on running around and being physically active and moving. It's actually spent on just maintenance, just basic total maintenance. And that's one of the reasons why physic we kind of never evolved not to be, you know, all that physically active when it wasn't necessary because until recently energy used to be limited, right? you had, it wasn't like, you know, 7-Elevens or Dunkin' Donuts or Whole Foods or

[16:16] whatever your, you know, favorite place to get food is right around the corner. You know, if you wanted something to eat, you had to go find it. You had to either, you know, hunt it or or gather it or dig it up. And and and so energy was limited. And when energy is limited, you have to engage in tradeoffs, right? And so if you spend energy on physical activity, that means you're not spending energy on taking care of your body or reproducing, which is what the only thing natural selection really cares about. And so the fact that our bodies are so expensive helps explain why we tend to avoid unnecessary physical activity because it prevents, you know, that that like for example, this morning I went for a five mile run. Uh so I spent about 500 calories. Those are 500 calories that I could have spent or on on my metabolism. And if I were energy limited, that would have been a bit of a problem, right? Which is why so why people in, you know, who are energy limited and already physically active, it makes no sense for them to go for a needless completely pointless 5 mile run in the morning. So technically, a calorie is the amount of energy it takes

[17:17] to raise one gram of water one degree centigrade. Right? So it's a unit of energy. And um and so we convert various kinds of energy into calories. There are other of course other units of of energy like the jewel for example but u calories are kind of a useful one and it's because we all you know our food is labeled in calories. So so calories the most common one but actually the calories that we mostly talk about that are on our food labels are actually kilo calories. They're actually a thousand calories. So when you when you look at a you know label for a chocolate bar or can of beans or something and it says there are 50 calories, this actually means that there are 50,000 calories, right? But anyway, that's that's that's neither here nor there, but that's fine. Um but so most of the time we're talking about calories with a capital C or kal kilo calories. And um and um you know, our bodies use a lot of calories. typical, you know, human uh body, you know, spends about you two to 3,000 calories or in this case kilo calories a day, you know, existing. That's that's your basil metabolic rate plus all the

[18:19] energy you spend, you know, running around, doing chores, making dinner, whatever it is you do for your day. When you go for a walk, you probably spend an extra 50 calories per mile. If you go for a run, you're spending probably an extra 100 calories per mile uh for that run. So that's that kind of gives you hopefully gives you a sense of of sort of what uh you know what kind of energy amounts we're talking about. Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, ad
