TITLE: Loneliness is a biological advantage for cancer | David Linden
VIDEO ID: fnqkHOejQ00
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fnqkHOejQ00
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-09
DURATION: 27:35
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] It's a weird thing to be a biomedical researcher and to also be battling a terminal illness. I'm not a cancer biologist and I never have been and I never will be. But because my background is in neuroscience, it has brought me to understand the interactions between mental function, brain function, and my particular cancer situation. I'm David Linden. I'm a professor of neuroscience at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. For many years, my laboratory has studied neuroplasticity, that is how the brain and the nervous system are changed as the result of experience in the world. How a neuroscientist prepares for death. So, nearly 5 years ago, I was given 6 to 18 months to live as a consequence of my diagnosis of synovial

[01:03] sarcoma, uh an aggressive form of cancer. I uh underwent surgery because they found a huge mass that uh was growing in my heart wall and the mass was enormous. It was about the volume of a Coca-Cola can. I had a very long and elaborate surgery. Before the surgery, they thought this mass was likely to be a teratoma, which is a group of cells that have been present in your body since fetal life that grow in a weird way. So, not a tumor, not cancer, a developmental abnormality. But unfortunately, they did the big surgery. They couldn't remove all of the mass. They had to leave some of it that had grown into my heart wall and remains there to this day, a bit about the size of a walnut. And when they did the pathology, they said, "Well, no, actually, you have cancer and you have a rare form of cancer called synovial sarcoma and you're probably going to die within 6 to 18 months. The way I have

[02:04] approached my terminal illness is what I call the way of the nerd. And the way of the nerd is to understand as much as you possibly can about your illness and to feel a sense of agency and control. And for me that has not been so much about learning all the molecular details about about cancer, but because my background is in neuroscience it has brought me to understand the interactions between mental function brain function and my particular cancer situation. For some people it's the last thing they want to do. The last thing they want to do is to dive into all the biological details and understand the ins and outs of the disease. And I completely respect that and feel like that is a valid choice.

[03:05] But for a subset of us, like me the way of the nerd is empowering and is a way to to to deal with a terminal illness and make it possible to to thrive in this in this liminal time while I'm still around. So cancer is an opportunistic bastard, right? Cancer is to cell growth that gets out of control. Uh there are many situations where we need our cells to divide and create more cells and for then for that process to stop. We need it when we grow as babies. Uh we need it when we grow up. We need it to regenerate certain tissues like in our skin that continually grow or the the lining of our our respiratory or our digestive system. These are things that are continually renewed. So, we need cells to divide. That's a fundamental thing. But, when it gets out of control, that's cancer. But, that's not just how cancer works. In other words, cancer isn't just a bunch of cells that start dividing and

[04:05] then that's all that happens. When I say that cancer is a bastard, what I mean is that cancer co-opts other systems in the body to prevent the tumor cells from being degraded by your own immune system. It sends out signals that interfere with the immune system and the cells of the immune system to make it think like, "Oh, there isn't really any problem. No, that was just a hoax. You don't actually need to attack me." And it also co-opts signals that that that cause the cancer to grow and spread. So, we know that many tumors, for example, uh send out chemical signals that attract blood vessels to grow in and nourish and feed the tumor and promote its growth. That's been known for quite a number of decades. What is really becoming more understood just in the last 10 or 15 years is that the

[05:06] same thing happens with nerves. So, there's a dialogue between tumor cells and nerves, actually several forms of dialogue. Many tumors secrete signals that cause nerves to grow into the tumor. They secrete molecules called neurotrophins, uh that cause nerve cells to grow in the direction of the tumor and ultimately actually uh penetrate the tumor. And these uh neurotrophins include molecules called nerve growth factor or NGF and brain-derived neurotrophic factor or BDNF. But, it's not just that the tumor talks to the nerves, uh the nerves talk to the tumors in many different ways. And one particular class of neuron, which are pain conveying sensory neurons, secrete a signaling molecule called calcitonin gene-related peptide or CGRP. CGRP

[06:09] affects immune cells that patrol around the edge of the tumor and and sort of nibble at its edges and and kill the cells on the edge of the tumor and as a result prevent it from growing and spreading. So, when CGRP affects these immune cells, which are called CD8 positive T lymphocytes, it suppresses their activity, so they don't nibble the edges of the tumor as as much. So, then the tumor can grow more. And so, tumors, when they are innervated, your prognosis becomes worse. And if we can prevent tumors from becoming innervated, this is a whole new promising realm in cancer therapy to slow the growth and spread of tumors. If you buy doctor a doctor a drink or two and you get them to talk to you,

[07:10] they're very likely to say it's not just the conventional medical therapy that determines the likelihood of someone's successful outcome when they're in the hospital or they're being treated in the office. It has to also do with their own mental state and their own psychosocial support. It's well known in cardiology that people recover better from heart attacks and from the treatment following heart attack if they have social support, if they have their family around them, if they have psychotherapy. And this is an observation that has been borne out in a number of studies, but the underlying biology has not been clear. Now, we have some very interesting experiments in mice, which are in early days, but are starting to draw out the biological pathways that might underlie that

[08:11] beneficial effect. And this comes from the laboratory of Esa Rolle's in Israel. And she has shown that if you artificially block the arteries of laboratory mice to give them heart attacks, that they can recover better if you artificially activate the brain's natural reward and expectation circuitry. This is the dopamine using circuitry that involve a a brain region called the ventral tegmental area. And if you use optical and genetic tricks to activate that circuitry, that the mice recover from their artificially experimentally induced heart attack much much faster. Their ability of their heart to forcefully contract and pump blood through the body comes back faster than it would otherwise, mimicking what we know about

[09:11] social connection and social and report support in humans recovering from heart attack. We can do things in laboratory mice that wouldn't be ethical to do in humans, like go in and and make manipulations and measurements. And so we can now understand a cascade that goes through immune signaling, involves a bypass through the liver that ultimately gets us to the heart and its recovery of function. So, it would be obviously comforting to think that social support, psychotherapy, the love of one's family and friends, and social connectedness can help you have a better cancer outcome, can increase your lifespan, reduce the spread, the metastasis of cancer, the growth of tumors. But, is this just something we like to think or is it real? And And at this point, there is enough epidemiological evidence suggesting that psychosocial support,

[10:13] either in the case of of psychotherapy or more informally through one's social connections, it's not a miracle, it can't replace chemotherapy or surgery or radiation, but it does seem to have some beneficial effect on cancer uh progression. What does this mean in terms about how we should think about making cancer therapy better? Well, obviously, there are behavioral things that you can do to make your to make your cancer better. Meditative practice, things that that reduce stress, seem to be good, and we seem to understand the biology of that because we know that stress hormone signaling promotes the growth and spread of tumors. We know that that psychotherapy reduces stress hormone signaling as well, but it's not just behavioral manipulations. Understanding

[11:13] that information is flowing from the brain to the cancer microenvironment, whether it's having effect on cancer cells directly or on the immune cells that are patrolling around and keeping the cancer in check, this allows us to develop new drug therapies as well. So, for example, there are certain types of cancer that have uh a neurotransmitter receptor on them called the beta-adrenergic receptor. This is the receptor for a neurotransmitter/hormone called noradrenaline, which confusingly also has the name norepinephrine. It's the same molecule. And people may have heard of drugs called beta-blockers, which are drugs that people take to to calm their heart rate and feel more calm if they're feeling anxiety. These same beta-blocking drugs for a subset of cancers seem to slow cancer progression because the beta receptors on the tumor

[12:14] cells contribute to cancer proje- uh uh progression. So, this understanding of brain-to-body signaling in cancer allows us not just to have better behavioral measures to combat cancer, but to have better drug use as well. There are a lot of correlational studies that have shown that when people exercise, their cancer outcomes are better. They live longer, uh they progress less quickly, they're more likely to go into remission. But, you got to be suspicious of these studies cuz the devil's in the details. Well, you could say, "Well, maybe the people who are more inclined to exercise, maybe their cancer wasn't as bad to start with. Maybe they didn't feel as ill, and that's why they're more likely to exercise." And so, it's not really that exercise makes it better, it's a complication of that. Or you might say, "Well, maybe the kind of people who are motivated to exercise a lot are also the

[13:15] kind of people who are more likely not to have bad habits like smoking or drug use. They're more likely to healthy diet, and it's the it's the reducing drug use and the healthy diet that's beneficial for cancer, and the exercise isn't even it. But, recently there have been a few randomized control studies where we take a group of of of people, and we say of cancer patients, and we say, "All right, you guys exercise, and you guys just like do whatever you want to do. We're giving you this pamphlet, but we're not going to enroll you in exercise class, we're not going to monitor you, we're not going to give you social support." And there was just a study published this year in 2025 out of Australia for colon cancer, and the result was remarkably strong. The people who were randomly placed in the exercise group had a 30% improvement in mortality over 8 years. If this were a drug effect, it would be

[14:16] everybody would want this drug. This would be a massive anti-cancer effect. This kind of study doesn't suffer from the same problems of these post talk association studies of is it really the exercise that gave the benefit or the things that go along with the exercise, something merely correlated with it. So, the evidence is really looking like the benefits of exercise for cancer are clear, and they're not small effects, they're big effects. If you're battling cancer, and you can bring yourself to do it, exercise is one of the very very best things that you can do. We're recording this in 2025. I was given 6 to 18 months to live in 20 21, and so you can do the math in your head and realize that I didn't, fortunately, really die in uh 6 to 18 months. And yet, here I am still alive, and people

[15:18] ask me, "Why do you think you were still alive?" And I say, "Well, I don't entirely know, but I think a portion of it comes uh from the deep love that I feel from my wife, Tina. And when I say this, people get a look on their face like, oh, isn't that sweet? He's complimenting his wife. He's taking off his scientist hat, and he is putting on his good spouse hat. And that's not the case. That's not what I mean. When I say that the deep and unconditional love that I feel from my wife is helping to keep my cancer at bay, I am saying that as a biomedical researcher, and I am saying that with the idea that this isn't occurring in the realm of of ether and spirituality, that it is occurring in the realm of biology. So, how might this happen? How do we get from my wife's deep and unconditional love to my cancer being suppressed?

[16:20] Well, the answer is we don't entirely know, but there's a couple of likely ways. One of them is that it's extremely likely that, like many tumors, my tumor receives nerve fibers from both the parasympathetic and the sympathetic nervous system, as well as sensory nerve fibers. And as a consequence, patterns of activity in my brain evoked by my wife's love, like activation of the ventral tegmental uh reward and anticipation circuitry, through their action in the hypothalamus and some other brain areas, are conveying signals, electrical signals, to my tumor that ultimately suppress its growth and spread. However, it is also very likely that

[17:21] this very same pathway, the activation of the reward anticipation circuitry in the brain, is producing modification of the brain's control of the immune system and is boosting my immune system through the secretion of immune signaling molecules called cytokines in a way that allows circulating T cells and naturally natural killer cells in my immune system to more effectively attack the surface of the tumor that's large in my heart wall. What's exciting about this, even though it's early days and even though we don't absolutely know that either of those two biological pathways are indeed the way that my cancer is being kept at bay. What's exciting is that we are now at a

[18:22] point where we have biological hypotheses for what before would have been solely behavioral or spiritual explanations. When I got the diagnosis, I was supremely angry. At age 59, I did not feel ready to die. I felt like I have a lot to do. I have people who depend upon me. I have a wonderful wife. Uh terrific children. I don't want to leave. And uh I was white hot angry with the universe. But at the very same time, I felt a very deep sense of gratitude. I've been fortunate in life. I've had a a wonderful life. I have terrific people around me. I've been able to have a job that has allowed me to not have a boss and to follow my own curiosity. And to use my mind in in ways that most

[19:26] people don't get. And so, what was remarkable as a neuroscientist is that we we tend to think of mental states as being unitary. Are you preparing to to to to to uh to fight or are you going to rest? But, it's possible to occupy two very divergent mental states at the same time. So, I could simultaneously be exceedingly angry and exceedingly grateful. And that was something that I didn't realize before my cancer uh taught me that. Another thing is that it really reinforced to me that our our brains and our minds are not built to give us the truth, to give us the lowdown about about anything. We're not We're not built to know the absolute values of things. Uh everything is of

[20:28] subjective. Everything that we perceive is subject to our emotional state and to our expectations. When I was diagnosed, I thought, well, if I could get five more years of life, that would be so wonderful. I could spend time with my family. I could travel. I could do some work in my laboratory. I could have my trainees finish their experiments naturally and not have their careers messed with. So many good things would happen. Getting five more years would be great when I was looking at a diagnosis of 6 to 18 months. But, if someone had just come up to me before cancer and said, "Well, you're going to die in 5 years." I would have said, "What do you mean? I'm only 59. I should get more than 5 years. What the hell are you talking about?" So, something as fundamental as 5 more years of life that we think of being having a very basic value doesn't. In one context, it seems

[21:28] like an impossible gift. In another context, it seems like being cosmically cheated. But, I think the realization that I had that was the most profound for me as a neuroscientist grappling with a terminal diagnosis was the fact that as much as I tried, I really could not and still to this day not cannot engage with the idea of my own death, of a world where I'm no longer in it. No, I can do practical things. I can make sure my will is in order. I can dot the i's and cross the t's, but that's not what I'm talking about. I'm talking about truly cognitively and emotionally engaging and thinking about a world with me no longer in it. I realized that my mind was really kind

[22:29] of skittering across the surface of this idea, that I was not able to engage with it deeply in the matter that I think it really deserved. This probably wasn't just my own personal failing. It was revealing something fundamental about what it's like to have a human mind. I've been in the in neuroscience for for a long time, over 40 years now, and there has been a fundamental change in how we think about the brain. We used to think that the brain was fundamentally reactive. That we waited for something information to come in from our senses and then we would do some processing on it and then react to it. And what we now know is that when we are spacing out, when our brain is idling, when we are not engaging with the outside world, that the brain is not just spacing out, that we are actively trying to predict

[23:31] the future. The brain is a prediction machine and and specifically, it's not just trying to predict the the future, it's trying to predict the near future. It's trying to predict the next few minutes, the next few hours, maybe the next few days. Is that rock flying through the air going to hit me in the head? Is this person walking towards me a friend or a foe? Uh am I likely to become hungry in the next few hours and how I should plan my day? These are all predictions that are happening in my brain while it idles, while it's in its so-called default mode. Now, the fact that the brain is trying constantly trying to predict the future presupposes that there will be a future. It presupposes that you're not dead and gone. And so I think this fundamental computation, this fundamental future predicting computation is not just what keeps me and perhaps others in my situation from truly

[24:34] engaging with our own mortality and imagining a world without us in it, but I would speculate that this is what has allowed for afterlife stories being so important in almost, not all, but almost all of the world's religions. Almost all of the world's religions have the story of an afterlife or reincarnation or melding of the divine or some kind of construct in which one's consciousness endures after we die. I think that this in some ways a bug. It is a bug. It's a side effect of the near future predicting circuitry in our brain that allows us to imagine that consciousness goes on after death. Now, I'm personally I'm not a person of

[25:37] faith. I think that when you die, you die. Your consciousness doesn't go on. But I am very sympathetic to these cross-cultural religious and spiritual ideas that consciousness endures. And I think ultimately there is a neurological and a biological explanation for why those stories are present all around the world. Some people say, "Well, do you appreciate the little things more? Like, do you appreciate, you know, the color in the sunset and the the taste of your tea in the morning?" And you know, to a certain extent, I guess I do. But really, I am appreciative in the time I have left of the very largest things that life has

[26:37] afforded me. You know, but my terrific wife who I love deeply. My wonderful children and the good friends and colleagues that I I that have been so supportive. This is what I'm thankful for. This is what I try to remember every day in the time I have left. The wonder and the privilege of being a a sentient being on this planet and be able to to have a mind and to and to be curious and to move through through the world in this way. It's It's a miracle. And uh I find myself ever grateful. >> Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
