TITLE: Physician: Autoimmune disease isn't your immune system attacking you | Giulia Enders
VIDEO ID: lx1djVcn1Gc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lx1djVcn1Gc
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-08-06
DURATION: 20:04
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] When you look at the history of humans trying to figure out which bacteria are bad, they made some very dull mistakes and simple mistakes in the beginning. There was a time where even surgeons would cut out a whole large intestine because they found bacteria in it, and people had some troubles with them. And that was, of course, horrible. Many people died back then because of that. We got a bit more differentiated and said, "Maybe it's certain species of bacteria being bad." So then, really asking and turning to the immune system taught science that it's not about all these boxes you want to put things in, but it's really about looking very detailed what's the interaction. My name is Giulia Enders. I'm an author and physician from Germany, and I just wrote my second book, which is called Organ Speak, what really means to listen to our bodies. >> Thank you for watching Big Think. If you'd like to support our work, we encourage you to join our members community. As a member, you'll receive our quarterly print magazine, a beautifully designed collection of the ideas and interviews that matter most.

[01:01] Big Think is for curious people who want to take deep dives into big ideas. To support the media you want to see in the world, go to bigthink.com/membership. And now, back to the interview. The immune system beyond the war metaphor. >> When we talk about the immune system, we oftentimes use words related to war and fighting and killing. And while that is one aspect of immunity, and also an important one, it's really not the whole story, and it's also sometimes quite a bit inaccurate. And so, I like to introduce a different picture here, and you can use it or not, but that was one that really had an impact on me when I was growing up. It was the best friend of my grandma, and he was a pianist from the United States. He came to Germany and then had a house somewhere in the forest, really. And every weekend all kinds of people would come there. And when I think back, it becomes pretty like special to me now because as a child you just take it as it is, but how

[02:01] safe everyone felt. And very different people felt so safe there. It was, you know, a kind of like a strict lawyer somewhere from the city and then a woman uh Iran with a difficult family background, then some, you know, theater director, a colorful person. And all these people, very different, just came together and felt good, felt safe, felt like being themselves. And later on I came to realize there was a different element to safety that Bill shares with the immune system, might say. And that was in a way really getting to know people, really known in a non-judgmental way, really being very curious about them. Our immune system does something absolutely similar, which is it roams our cells every second. While I'm sitting here, it does so. And then asks, "How are you doing? What's going on here? How's it going over here?" So that it can really make sure safety is happening in in a smart way. For example, it would not attack an optical

[03:02] nerve if there's a virus sitting in it because we might go blind. But it very well so does that when it's an our throat cell and it can just replace the cell. So it is smart in a way, but that's just because it really knows, you know, our cells and our body. And Bill did the same thing. And then also for some people Bill just tolerated them brilliantly. Maybe he wasn't too fond of them, but you know, it didn't matter. Why waste energy to have some unnecessary inflammations or autoimmune diseases are you know, not only wasteful to energy resources, but dangerous. And then the last part is also to really cooperate well and friendly with good microbes, which of course Bill did brilliantly having all these wonderful friends and people. And our immune system does the same thing with our gut microbes and microbes all over our skin and like surfaces where it cooperates with them in order to keep us really, really safe cuz those are the ones producing like tiny antimicrobial

[04:04] peptides or other things and giving us vitamins from our food and it if it didn't do that there would be no safety. So, attacking and war metaphors really aren't the only way to safety. And Bill and the immune system, you know, kind of gave me that answer. The thing about microbes and often times I think we get a really wrong picture of this is that most of the time they're absolutely not dangerous or harmful or threatening. The thing about bacteria is that there's like quadrillions of them on this earth, but really just 1,400 species are known pathogens. So, this is a tiny fraction. If you compare it to humans, it would be as if only six people on this planet are kind of like nasty and mean and the rest is quite all right. And okay. So, I think this gives you a bit of a better proportion of what bacteria actually are and that they're not bad all the time. And you know what? Actually, their main task is to just borrow around genes to animals, to us humans, and help us with things like

[05:05] digestion or just protect us from other bacteria that shouldn't be on our surfaces by sitting there and taking up space. So, you know, I think this is rather the full picture on bacteria. When you look at those who are capable of making us sick, um there are some factors sometimes funnily similar to factors in human life or psychology that aren't so beneficial. And one of them, for example, is stealing, but stealing things that are important to the other person. So, microbes really here are decided upon like sort of a Robin Hood scheme. Cuz if you take something from a host, from a human body that the body doesn't necessarily need, that's okay, you know, that's not a microbe, a bad microbe. And then some bacteria will take some of our food and they produce something out of it and then we don't even mind and maybe even good for us, but others they take nutrients for example like iron. And iron is really scarce and hard to get from food. So, those usually are pathogens doing that. And it leads to one interesting

[06:07] phenomenon, which is when we have an infection, our immune system will cleverly get all the iron out of our blood, like put it somewhere in hidden spot and then wait until we're good again and release the iron back into the blood. So, shortly after an infection you might have a lowered iron value when you go to a blood test for example, but that's not necessarily a bad thing because it will probably return within the next day. And then other aspects for pathogenicity for bacteria being harmful to us is for example overstepping borders. Not being okay with, you know, a line someone draws and says, "No, this is my throat, so you can't invade here." Bad microbes will just ignore that there's a limit. Good microbes will just say, "Oh, apparently there's a wall, there's a throat wall that we're not going to, you know, invade. We're just going to stay here on the mucous membrane and we'll be fine just living here." And then everyone can get along well, you know. But bad microbes will ignore that sometimes and even cross the borders with going into ourselves. That's

[07:07] usually then a bad sign, not tolerating when someone really says, "Up to here, no further." And then something else for example is well, a sort of gaslighting you could almost say, which is called immuno-invasion. So, when our bacteria notice that our immune system is not okay with them doing something to our cells, they have a choice. They can either become a little nicer, shutting off some genes that are irritating us, or they can try to go around the reaction of the immune system. And, you know, bad bacteria opt for the latter. And in the very mild way, sometimes this doesn't have to be horrible, can just mean that they make our immune system more tolerant. So far then, that's still okay. Some of them might even protect us from unnecessary allergies. But if they go further and really like fake it or really mask themselves or really pretend that they're not there and the immune system is looking for a problem

[08:07] but they're hiding from it and pretending like maybe it's our own cells, they use proteins from our blood to cover themselves and seem like, you know, maybe we are ourselves doing that harm to our to our own body cells, then this is the case of immune evasion and it's a sign that, you know, they're tricking us. They're not reacting to our upset, they're just hiding from it. And then it's usually bacteria doing some pretty stupid or dangerous infections. Then there's also toxins, which is little things bacteria produce that fool our own regulation mechanisms. So for example, with toxin-producing bacteria that cause diarrhea, they will go in between our gut cells and there is a place where they can initiate diarrhea. And uh by doing that, the cells will then, you know, spread a little bit and let all the liquids through so diarrhea can happen. And but this is just used by these bacteria to get in this area of in between gut cells. And so they're using

[09:09] something our body actually does to protect us, but to their own advantage and completely unregulated. This is usually horrible diarrhea with like ounces and ounces of liquids coming out compared to normal diarrhea where after a day or so and a few times on the toilet, you're okay. So manipulating in a way that you make others think they're doing the right thing or they're actually moving in a good way, but it's really to their disadvantage. That's something very bad and toxin-producing bacteria are oftentimes, you know, uh the ones we have to vaccinate against or we have to have some um preliminary medicine or caution because they can cause some quite heavy infections. Some bacteria turn into bad bacteria well, because of us, because we're doing something. And this is a rather like new finding, too, because we now have all these great ways to um analyze bacteria sitting on all kinds of surfaces of the human host, and we see that actually quite a few people have throat uh

[10:10] soreness-causing bacteria or diarrhea bacteria or some other bacteria that aren't supposed to be good, but they're not doing anything. They're just hanging around. And so, now we understand a bit better that sometimes if bacteria are, you know, part of a good community, they're not being attacked by the immune cells or by stress reactions in our body, they won't unpack all of their properties and all of their maybe disease-causing factors. And they will just, you know, go with the flow and be a bit milder version of themselves. And also, when you look at things like um you know, pandemics um related to us, you know, maybe chopping down all kind of trees in the forest and then animals going to city areas and they carrying bacteria or viruses that aren't necessarily bad for them, but for us, or just having, you know, some egg salad standing around too long at the party and it has then a few more salmonella after a while. So, what we do to others, to microbes, also can cause them to become more evil or disadvantageous to us. So, we are a factor as well.

[11:13] I think the way the immune system judges things, if they're like bad or good, uh sometimes gives you a fresher perspective on what bad is. Because we tend to now put things in boxes saying like, "Oh, this is bad, stupid." Like we look down on it, it's horrible. It's just like of a negative quality of of overall. And then we have the good things we aspire to be and so on. But for an immune system, it really has to be a bit more differentiated. And it's also not as simple as saying something is just bad. And when you look at the history of humans trying to figure out which bacteria are bad, they made some very dumb mistakes and simple mistakes in the beginning. And they just got better at evaluating these kind of things by learning from the immune system. So, initially, for example, humans would say all bacteria are bad because they found them in, you know, diseases. And then they said, "Oh, they cause tuberculosis. So, bacteria in general must be horrible." And then there was a time

[12:15] where even surgeons would cut out a whole large intestine because they found bacteria in it. And people had some troubles with them. And that was, of course, horrible. Many people died back then because of that. We got a bit more differentiated and said, "Mm, maybe it's certain species of bacteria being bad." And you could almost say this relates to like racial theory saying this species is bad or that. And those are very stupid mistakes because it's not that simple. And in every species, there's bacteria doing great things and bacteria doing a bit of trouble. And then when we got better and better in science and more nuanced, we we we saw that even of the same kind, like let's take E. coli bacteria, they can be genetically almost identical, but one is just an E. coli hanging around in the gut going boo boo boo, and the other one is an E. coli causing a disease like EHEC. So, a very severe bloody intestinal infection, very dangerous to your life. So, then really asking and turning to the immune system taught science that it's not about all these boxes you want to put things in,

[13:16] but it's really about looking very detailed what's the interaction. Are bacteria going that way around your immune system to avoid it? Are bacteria stealing something from the you that you need and then you can even go further and ask what is our take in it. What did we do to these microbes to sometimes react that way? How you know, how did it come to play? Sometimes these are just survival strategies. Like a sore throat causing bacteria doesn't want to harm anyone. It's just trying to find a new place to live, you know? And then maybe now with very new approaches to antimicrobial therapies, we're not even planning on killing them all with antibiotics. We're trying to be even smarter. We're trying to just maybe um block one protein that's doing us harm, for example. Or really by that maybe even teaching the bacteria to select the ones that are not doing this disadvantageous thing, but maybe are becoming a bit nicer on the way. So, it's really about making this interaction smoother, smarter, more diplomatic. For for quite a lot of bacteria, we might actually be able to

[14:18] go around, you know, them harming us, but actually becoming just like some colleagues sitting around doing nothing. By getting to know them and understanding them way better. And I think that can be a lesson for the bad things in life as well. Don't just, you know, shoot them or try to push them away, but really understanding, looking into the finer reasons why can sometimes give you a good way out. And sometimes it can also show you there's no good way, so we really have to avoid those, but you know, not always. And these cases are then the interesting ones. So, often times when people are diagnosed with an autoimmune disease, what they will hear in a doctor's office is the sentence that your immune cells are attacking your own body. And I really don't like that sentence and I also think it's scientifically not accurate anymore. Because what we know now and looking at research from like the '90s, the danger hypothesis and so on, is that the immune system is not just stupidly aggressive or something. All the cells that exist

[15:20] in our immune system just have this one goal, which is to keep us safe. And sometimes they might go a bit too far with it. You could even say almost like overprotective parents, they really want to be very sure that nothing horrible is happening. So, they just do a bit too much and that can be, you know, an ungood thing, I would say. And of course, those diseases have to be taken seriously and they're not fun and it's not good that the immune system is making a mistake like that. But, it's really not because it's just aggressively turning against us. And I think understanding that can also really sometimes shift your perspective on how to deal with it and how to, you know, have this phenomenon and treat it. Because, for example, we have now all these additional therapies or options that besides medicals and medications, you can also turn to and see which ones work for you. Doing like stress relief techniques, looking or watching your diet closely, some have like meditation and aroma

[16:20] therapy and all these kinds of things that can be used. It's not because it's just like saying do some good things, but it's because making your body feel better sends also a little notice to your immune cells, I'm doing better, you can, you know, maybe tone it down a little bit. And taking medications for sometimes decades of your life also, I think, feels very different when you say, I'm swallowing to like fight back this stupid autoimmunity compared to saying, I'm taking this to like calm you down, you know. You don't have to go hard. I'm okay. I think that these things do matter and I've seen in hospital and the way that my patients reacted to when I could explain it differently that these things matter. And as a one example of that, for example, is one of the like original moments for me to understand that this was an important way of explaining it differently. I had a patient in uh, very early years of my medical career that was diagnosed with a chronic inflammatory bowel disease. And

[17:21] she had been in our hospital a few years earlier for a very severe intestinal infection. And she was so downbeat about receiving this diagnosis, understandably. And I went to her room a little bit later in the day and I said, "You know, your gut really witnessed this horrible infection. And I know it seems like, you know, double trouble to now also be diagnosed with this disease, but it's also because your immune system had this very dangerous thing happening and they had then to learn that they should have reacted a little bit earlier or could have done more or could have been a bit more careful. And now they're just following through with this lesson. In diseases like chronic inflammatory bowel disease, they may be going against things like like just very harmless gut bacteria, you know, initiating inflammation right away. And it is a mistake, but it's not because it's aggressive and stupid. It's really because it witnessed something horrible and now really tries to protect you at all costs, going a bit too far.

[18:23] And I think just understanding it this way helped my patient. And it gave her a more mild attitude towards this disease and I think, you know, I hope this does something. One lesson that the immune system really taught me and that sticks with me to this day is that, you know, safety doesn't mean having no risks at all. And really, you know, getting all the bad away from you, far, far away. Safety really also means coming up with solutions, being flexible, finding ways. And our immune system does exactly that, you know, by having some sort of memory cells, by reacting towards germs flexibly, whether they are in a wound somewhere or somewhere in the optic nerve or in the gut. And so, it has all these ways of finding solutions instead of just and only attacking stuff or keeping away things that are risky. And thinking of safety like this has given me a bit less like anxiousness about safety in my own life.

[19:24] I know that when I know myself and I just look out for maybe different ways of solving something, I'm I'm I'm well off, you know, compared to just trying to have everything risky far away. >> Four times a year, we print a magazine worth putting your phone down for. Big Think Premium Print magazine is built with custom artwork and expert insight from the world's biggest thinkers. No AI slop, no rage bait, just big ideas for curious people. Support the media you want to see in the world. Go to bigthink.com/membership to join.
