TITLE: Aura Is Real. Here's the Science.
VIDEO ID: mQOie2JHpPU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mQOie2JHpPU
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-08-03
DURATION: 14:20
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] So, I want to talk to you about a very certain kind of person. I think once I start describing them to you, you're going to know exactly who I mean, because you've probably met one or two of these people in your life. And they're incredibly rare and incredibly impactful. Also, I want to apologize again like our previous video. It's a bit of a mess in here. Obviously, it's not the backdrop you're used to seeing if you watch my videos. New move, lot changing, lot going on. Things are happening, but to give a little bit of time, we'll have a real background. But I promise you the content of this video is a lot better than perhaps the visuals of the background will be. But anyways, this person that I'm talking about is someone who walks into a room and just genuinely doesn't need anything from it or the people in it. They're not performing, they're not posturing, they're not acting. They aren't subtly working to be seen or perceived in a certain way. They're just there. They are present.

[01:00] They are at ease in a way that is almost so noticeable because it's so uncommon. If someone's coming to your mind, that's good. Keep them there, okay? I feel like you don't often notice this or you can't quite put a finger on it first. You just What do I What do I say now? It's like aura? Is that what Gen Z says these days? Uh but I feel like Asher, you've been around these people for a while. You realize more what this is. They have nothing to prove to anyone. And it's not an act, because an act would require effort and they aren't giving any effort. I've noticed this more and more as I have elevated in my career because the more I elevate my career, the more I'm around these type of people and it's quite profound. You can say things to them and poke at them in ways that you can't do that to someone who isn't in that position. They say like make fun of a weak man and he'll yell. Make fun of a successful man and he'll laugh with you. But anyways, I've spent a lot of time thinking about these people. What they have, how they got it, and whether it's something that a person can actually

[02:01] build and perhaps train is the right word, or whether you're just born that way. I've come to think it can be built, but the path there is probably not what most people think it is. I also want to be very clear about why this one matters to me. Not only have I felt this very impactfully in my life. I really struggled with self-confidence and similar concepts to this, maybe lack of aura, and as Gen Z would say, most of my life. And it wasn't until, you know, mid-20s or so that I really started to find myself. Also, a lot of my audience, and I put my younger self in this group again, like I said, are people who define themselves by what they produce, by achievement, by performance, by being impressive. And there's nothing wrong with ambition. I made a video about this just last week. But I feel like ambition can be a very slippery slope in a way, because I think the way that we see it in today's society can really have a toxic connotation to it. What I'm

[03:01] saying is that many people will spend their entire life trying to prove to someone or everyone something that they wanted to prove, and they never once felt like they actually did it. As someone who's been there, it is a miserable way to live. So, this conversation is all about what is underneath that striving and what it might look like to actually let go of that. So, when I was going through this, I tried to organize this and break this down appropriately. Let's start with the concept itself, the need to prove. Where does this come? If you watch this closely in yourself, it's usually not about the achievement. The achievement is the surface. Underneath it is usually a question, am I enough? And the proving is an attempt to answer that question through external means, not internal means. The problem with answering it that way is that that answer never stays. You achieve the thing, okay? And for a moment there's relief, and then the question comes back because the question was never really about the thing. The question was about

[04:02] something that you have not resolved. So, you reach for the next achievement, and the next, and you do this for decades, and before you know it, you haven't lived your life, you haven't been present, you've always been striving. You may be pretty successful, but you don't really feel fulfilled. And I've seen this in patients time and time again. I've had this conversation in clinic. I mean, I'm like seriously genuinely accomplished people by any external measure who are still at 60 trying to prove something to someone who literally did not care or stop to pay attention at all, or at least stopped caring a long time ago, or maybe isn't even alive anymore. The proving is aimed at something that you cannot hit. And until you see that, you will not find peace, at least in this way. And I know my audience demographics, okay? I have plenty of 40, 50-year-old people in my audience, but listen, I'm telling you I mean this is obviously very relevant to you as well, but to any of the younger people watching this, male, female, I don't

[05:02] care, okay? Please pay attention to this concept. It will give you so much life to your years. Now, I want you to contrast all this to the person that I described at the start, the one who has nothing to prove. Here's what's interesting about that person. Not that they stopped achieving. A lot of them are doing very serious work in the world. In fact, many of them are achieving much more than the rest of other people. The difference is that the work is no longer the main concept of their sense of self. They're not doing it to answer that question. They've answered that question in some other way, likely a long time ago. Internally. And I'm telling you, it is hard to fake this aura, okay? We're going to keep using that word cuz it makes me laugh. These people have a kind of stillness. They listen better because they're not waiting for their turn to be impressive. They can be wrong without it threatening anything, themselves, their identity, their self-worth because it's not riding on any of their importance. They can sit with someone

[06:04] who is incredibly successful and feel genuinely good about it because it doesn't take anything from them. They aren't coming from a place of lack. I truly believe that this is one of the most underrated forms of freedom that there is. I really do. Most people are walking around carrying a immensely heavy weight that we can't see. And they are constantly managing this and it is draining and it's exhausting. And if you can let go of that weight, it is so palpable how you can feel it. So, the obvious question that you may be asking here is how does someone actually get there? And I don't want to be cautious here because I don't want to give you something that sounds incredibly easy. It may be easy for you, but I just don't want to blanket statement this. Everyone's unique. When it actually just is worthless and means nothing cuz it doesn't relate to you. I don't want to do that. So, let me tell you what I've actually observed. The people who have nothing to prove almost always went through something to get there. It is rarely a person who had an easy smooth life and just happened to arrive at a very deep self-acceptance. Now, I

[07:07] want to say that with a big disclaimer and I'm trying not to go on tangents here because I am trying to stay timely. But, I still am a very firm believer in having and for a very long time that I really haven't met many people that just had this incredibly easy life. People will always find some concept about someone Oh, well, if I had this, I could do that, too. Oh, if I had this and there is certainly parts of that to a degree at least in my belief. But, oftentimes I find, you know, let me the trust fund baby or, you know, it's just a random example, right? Yes, they had the money and the resources, but they had a horrible parenting situation and they grew up in a loveless household, etc. It's just kind of what I've observed over time. I'm not weighing how that affects people. We're not going to get into that. I guess what I'm saying is I just don't want to act like there are people out there who just have this perfect, incredibly easy life and they have done nothing to achieve anything and they're just thriving. I That's just rare, I feel like. But anyways, I find more often than not that these people had some sort of failure that kind of stripped away this image

[08:08] that they'd been maintaining, whether they were clawing onto it or not. Maybe a loss, maybe an illness, could be a job or some period that they were using to prove their worth got taken away from them. And they had to find out whether there was anything underneath that. And these people had to find another way to live. There's a concept that Young wrote about called the shadow, the parts of ourselves that we would rather not look at. And we spend an enormous amount of energy avoiding. What I've noticed is that the people with this quality of groundedness have usually been forced to look at their shadow. Sometimes not my choice, sometimes they did. Life made them often times. And maybe that was months or years of a battle, something finally came to light for them. This is why I think this quality is so rare, because most people, when life hands them that moment, do absolutely everything they can to avoid that. You will reach for the next distraction. You'll bury yourself in your smartphone. That's why constantly make videos about stopping doing that. This is how you unearth this, okay? The next achievement, the next thing

[09:09] that lets them not look at the shadow. And the avoidance works very well in the short term. It just costs you the life that you probably actually want. The person that has nothing to prove is usually the person who at some point had no choice but to find out who they were without the proving. And they discovered they could actually live with that person. So, how do we avoid you having to wait for catastrophe in life? Good news here. You can do the same work deliberately before you're forced into it. That's why you've heard me say before that life will give you little nudges before it kicks you in the throat. Uh listen to the nudges. You ignore them long enough, it will bring you to your knees. I find at least that when I'm really tuned in and present, life flows a lot smoother and success comes quite easily. The first piece you probably need to notice is just noticing the proving, what you're trying to do. Just notice it. Try to catch yourself in the moment where you're about to do something not because

[10:09] you actually want to do that, but because how it will be perceived. You don't have to stop. Just see it clearly at the start. Most people don't ever get this far because it's kind of uncomfortable. The second piece is deliberately spending time where there's no one to perform for. This connects to something that I've talked about before, the value of genuinely being alone, in silence, without filming it, because you don't need to prove it in a social setting. Life really quiets down when there's no audience. And in that quiet, you start to get a sense of who you are underneath all of it. That sense is what I want you to build. The third piece, and potentially the hardest one, is doing something that might be difficult because most people won't see it. There's no audience for this, and there's no applause. The reason for this is because the entire concept of proving depends on being witnessed. When you do hard things in private, purely because they matter to you, you build a sense of worth that doesn't require anyone else's eyes on it. And that is the foundation that this entire thing rests on. Focus

[11:10] on this. None of this is fast. Sometimes it works in months, sometimes it works in years, but it does add up. You will notice plenty of differences over that time span. At some point, you notice that you can walk into a room and you don't need anything from it. This video might not do well because of that concept, because this is not a how to reinvent your life in 7 days video. But I'm telling you those videos are short-winded. Those concepts, they may be helpful, but they likely won't last. If you can master this concept, if you can work through this, you will be a person who is absolutely unstoppable, who is magnetic in every room they go into. I cannot begin to describe this to you enough. Please focus on this. The person who has nothing to prove. They are not an empty soulless person, okay? They are so full, so full to the point that they can actually start filling other

[12:11] people's cups up because the other people often can't. I'm telling you I think this is available to more people than they even believe themselves. It does not require a personality that you were born with. It requires being willing to look at what you have been avoiding in doing the quiet work that probably no one is going to clap for, at least when you're doing it. Obviously, there are downstream effects and accomplishments that you will achieve because of that that sure you can get your applause for, but you really won't care as much then. And I want to make a quick disclaimer. I'm not saying that being celebrated is a bad thing. It's great. It feels great and it's awesome. We should celebrate people. It's great. But just begin, okay? And keep going. One day you will realize that the weight that you have been carrying for probably your whole life, the constant effort that is proving is just a little bit lighter than it used to be. And then lighter again. And eventually, you will find a significant peace. If any of this is landing, if this resonated with you, the much deeper version of how I've worked through this in my own life and how you can, too, is

[13:13] all in my book, more than I can put in a YouTube video, even though I try to go fast. I'm looking at my timer and I didn't. But is all in here and how to live a complete comprehensive life that I think will build you the best, most powerful life you can imagine. My book, From Dull to Doctor, How I Trained My Brain and Body to Thrive and How You Can, Too. It is one of the most honest things I've made. Took me 3 years to get you this book as I wanted to make sure it was right for you. The link's in the description. Okay, I'll put it at the top for you. It's in all formats. I hope you enjoy. And if you wanted a free version of a shorter concept, I have a free 30-day blueprint that we can add as a starting point. I will link that to you as well. I'm trying to meet people with where they're at. Also, if you found value, please like, comment, Hit that notification so you don't miss another amazing video like this. I post another life-changing video like this once a week, sometimes more. Please share this video with a loved one if you found value. It is completely free and the least that you can do to help them. And

[14:13] as always, I'm Dr. Matt Jones. Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next one.
