TITLE: What Your Feed Is Actually Doing to Your Brain
VIDEO ID: PvZl9gq0w0A
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PvZl9gq0w0A
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-05-17
DURATION: 18:20
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] So, I feel like most of us have had the experience of picking up our phone and feeling fine. And then putting it down feeling much worse. You know, like after you finish scrolling or doing what you're doing, you may feel a little more anxious, more distant, and not really in your body anymore as much or in your in your head. A little more irritable, perhaps. A lot less present. And we're just going to chalk that up till like a bad day or maybe you don't even really notice it because it's so common or that's just the way things are. That's just how I feel. But I don't think that's really what's happening. And I want to walk you through what I actually think is going on because I think once you see this and understand it from this perspective, it will drastically change how you relate to all of this. And hopefully drastically change your life for the better. And I want to be really clear up front. This is not a get off your phone video. I've made those. You've You've heard those particularly from me. You know you're probably on your phone too much. That's really not the conversation today. And this is

[01:01] definitely something you're going to want to hear. This is about something much more specific though, something much less talked about. It's about how these platforms are engineered and it's done in a very specific way. What they're actually optimizing for. And what that does to your emotional baseline and your brain over time. Because those are two very different things from just you have too much screen time. This is coming from a physician who's seen this in themselves. I'm not a hypocrite here. I I really have. I've been through this. That's why I'm trying to talk to you about it. Someone who's seen this in in patients and clients I've worked with many times. And also a content creator who knows dang well how these algorithms work. So, I just want to jump into it and I'm going to talk fast at times, okay? I do that because I respect your time. I don't want to make this a 30-minute video. I'm trying to get you a lot of information very quickly so you can go about your day and continue to work on your life, okay? If there's a part you thought I went by too quickly, just replay it or play it on a slower mode, whatever works for you. So, I'm going to start by just talking about the thing that I don't think either most people

[02:03] realize or want to take the time to fully sit with and understand. The algorithm is not trying to show you things that you like. I'm going to say that again. The algorithm is not trying to show you things that you like. It's trying to keep you on the platform. Those are two very different things. And the fastest way to do that is usually not to make you feel good, at least not all the time. It's to make you feel something very strongly. Outrage keeps most people scrolling longer than happiness does, hence the news, okay? It's been going on for a very long time. They kind of engineered this and they they really pioneered this concept. Anxiety keeps people on board a lot more than just satisfaction and enjoyment does a lot of times. Threat, desire, comparison, all of it activates something in the brain that makes it very hard to look away. The engineers who built these platforms figured this out.

[03:03] The insane amount of data that they have told them this. And social engineers were able to make the best and most optimized systems to keep people on the platforms. This was kind of slowly being optimized over time with like mainstream news and honestly, Disney was really involved with like really good social engineers. And then all of a sudden, we just hit a breaking point where we went way up on screen time. They got so much better so quickly and we were not ready for it. My theory is that they just so much more access to data now because everything is data mined so heavily that it was easy to make these optimizations. So, what ends up on your feed isn't usually a reflection of what you actually want. It's a reflection of what keeps you engaged and activated. Those to most people can similar on the outside, but they're not the same at all. They're not even close. I actually see this in clinic sometimes. There are people who come in chronically on the edge, low level of anxiousness. They're

[04:05] kind of like irritable. They just say, "I'm just not myself anymore. It must be this." People will pin it on everything else except for lifestyle. "This is just how I am." And some people obviously have more of a genetic predisposition to some things, but I always like to start talking about what their daily inputs are, what they're doing, what they're watching, how they're using their technology and their devices, and it's fascinating. And a lot of times, it really starts to make sense. Like nonstop, like it's constant low-level engagement. You're coming from work and then you're coming home and you're starting to scroll, and you're being emotionally activated in content for months and years, and you don't really register what's happening because it's sometimes a slow burner. You're just like, "Oh, I just can't shake this feeling." But that's it. That is the reason. We remove this, and they get so much better. And I love it because there have been times where that is one less prescription I have to write someone. That is one less chronic medication that they need to be on, and that is a dang

[05:05] successful day in my practice. I love that. Now, again, I always have to make these disclaimers on here. We can't stereotype and blanket this across a whole population. Please don't come into my comments with the "Well, I this and this this." Look, every encounter I have is an individualized encounter, okay? Try to do what's best for the person in front of me. I do see this a lot, and it does work a lot, okay? Not trying to say one way or the other that people shouldn't be on this or Okay? Let's just just take a breath before we hit the keyboard. So, moving on, I want to dig a little bit more into this. Let's talk about what all this can do to kind of your emotional baseline and how. So, your nervous system often times seems to resonate with what it's exposed to. That's kind of how it works. It's meant to respond, right? If you spend a significant portion of your day in a low-grade state of outrage or anxiety or really too I don't cuz you may tell me that your feed is calm, but there's a constant swing of emotions on these platforms, right? You're 2 seconds

[06:07] you're you're laughing and crying and you you flip it and all of a sudden it's a story about someone dying. And and that that is a swing that probably wasn't meant to happen like that. And eventually your baseline starts to kind of drift. The things and tell me if you resonate with this that should feel like a crazy spike, like something that if you were like put a naive person who hasn't been exposed to these algorithms and these platforms I think they would be very overwhelmed. But these start to feel normal. They're they're your norm now. And that calm starts to feel strange. Feels like something's missing. The stimulation isn't there. I went through a period where I noticed I couldn't relax at the end of the day without picking up my phone. I would walk to the bathroom. I would pick up my phone. That's ridiculous. That mean I'm sorry. A lot of you probably do it. That's ridiculous. And when I would put it down there was this like residual noise. And my nervous system was like waiting

[07:08] for something to react to. It's like it was so ready. It was primed. That isn't a biological flaw. That's trained. And again, this can be more subtle than you think it is. Like I know you're probably watching this you may be thinking I don't feel like I'm running from a tiger right now or something like that. It doesn't have to be that obvious. But why don't you go try to meditate for 5 minutes and try to lean into this emotion and this feeling and this sensitivity. Then come back here and tell me if you think there's something off. If it's hard to plunge yourself into the silence and the calm and the peace, you're in that trained state of hyper-reactivity most likely. And there's plenty of research that showed measurable changes with all this. Elevated perceived stress, dysregulation of how people process emotions, which is becoming more and more of a problem. There's actually a lot more research on this recently. Heightened states of negativity bias. And a much harder time returning to calm

[08:09] after something stressful happens. We're bad at resetting because my theory is that you you've moved your baseline from here to up here, and you heighten it more and you can only come down to like back around here again. You It's hard to get all the way back down, okay? And the brain learns to stay very ready, and that has a cost long-term. And before I move on, I really do want to take a quick second to point out that this whole thing I just did, that is not something that I have like sheer scientific data on. That's more my interpretation of the data. I always like to clarify where there is a difference there. Um it to me makes common sense, but I haven't found like a clear representation of that concept necessarily. Um but that's my interpretation of the data. I want to make sure that part is clear. Where the rest of it is just clear data. And I am going to start moving faster here because like I said, I respect your time. But I do want you to know where this cost you. The cost shows up in many aspects

[09:10] of your life. It shows up in how much mental bandwidth you have for the people around you. And that's incredibly impactful. It shows up in how you handle decisions when you're tired or when you're not. It's whether you can sit with your thoughts for more than a few minutes without reaching for something. These are core components to life. Don't throw them away for another dopamine scroll. Okay, I want you to stay with me now because I know we're getting longer in the video, but this is very, very important and this is where the scene is going to get more practical. Okay? Here is what I find genuinely concerning about all of this and again, I think this is really important. When your brain is repeatedly exposed to high arousal emotionally charged content, it starts to weight that kind of thing more heavily. The dramatic, the urgent, the provocative and by comparison, the slower things start to feel like less. Deep work gets harder to get into and

[10:10] that is so critically important in today's world. I do make a lot of videos on this. Reading feels like it takes much more effort. When's the last time you read a book? A regular conversation with someone that you care about can feel like it's missing something, some sort of umph behind it. A kind of like stimulation to it. That is it. Boredom. I think that's just your nervous system that's been recalibrated and your attention system has been hijacked and trained on a certain level of input that is not obtainable in the natural world. And the part that I've sat with for a while that I'm trying to articulate better that I think is a little bit more difficult to really nail down, but I do think it matters. When your attention is constantly being pulled towards this fake, systematic urgency, your own life can start to feel not enough, insufficient in comparison.

[11:11] The slow, real things, the building something valuable, thinking something through, which is a really unique concept today in today's world, actually being present with the people around you, which is probably one of the most important things we can do in our life, genuinely. Those start to register as less interesting than they actually are. Not because they are less interesting, but because your brain has been conditioned to expect more stimulation than they can provide. The root of this, why I make this video, and I really hope this hits home when I say this, and it it might not because you might not have seen it as much, but as a physician, I'm in a really unique position to see people in all walks of life. And I have watched genuinely good people sleepwalk through incredibly good lives because of this. They wake up and they're 70 years old,

[12:13] and they come to my office, and they've never reflected on their life. And of course, social media wasn't around back then, but then it there were other triggers throughout humanity, right? And it's just scaling so much worse now. It's so much faster. And I've watched this in myself at certain points. And it's devastating to watch. This world has been deprived and starved of your light for far too long. Please, don't make us wait any longer. I hope that makes you take this seriously. So, what do you actually do about this? The first thing is I would stop treating this as a sheer willpower problem. These systems are engineered specifically to override your intentions. Trying to brute force your way through less phone or less hyperstimulation or whatever that may be, doesn't work for most people long term. I think you need real friction to this,

[13:14] physical friction. Uh there are lots of NFC tag app blockers that you just can't just override them like an app blocker on your phone. I know we've tried them. I'm sure you have, too, the built-in ones. They work to a degree, but you can just uh no, I'm going to keep going. And you can override them. There are plenty of these. I use one called Brick. It's like a little NFC tag I can just magnetize to my fridge. You tap it, it locks whatever apps you have set to lock, and you cannot unlock them until you have tapped it again. I'm telling you that physical friction will change your life. The other day I went like 38 days with my social media's blocked, and I do this for a living, okay? So, don't tell me that it's too hard to do that. Um it's I'm not going to buy that excuse. Again, I don't know the people at that company. I just it's a product that I like. It's simple. It works well. Um I will drop a link at the top of the description for you if you're wanting it. Uh I can drop an affiliate link cuz you get a discount. I'll also drop a non-affiliate link for you. Look, this channel is successful because it doesn't

[14:16] have to be, okay? So, pick whichever one you feel comfortable with. I find that that intervention works better for most people because it takes the decision out of the moment. And within a day or two, you're really not going to want to unbreak the phone. I'm telling you. You're going to want to leave it. I do feel like there's one more very important thing, though, and I think a lot of people miss this. It's giving your nervous system something to return to. The reason this habit is so hard to stop is because that stillness is uncomfortable for so many people. That discomfort is usually telling you something. There's something unprocessed. There's something that surfaces when the noise goes away. This is work that you need to get through. Most people have figured out, without really intending to, that if they constantly keep the noise in their life, they don't have to feel it. You don't have to address these things. You don't have to sit with your mind. It can be difficult at times, but it's worth doing to have a good, well-lived life, I think. Working on

[15:17] that, actually sitting there with what may come up or what's there deeply changes something. I've experienced this, okay? The people I know who have done this a lot have a sense of vibe to them, a sense of how they carry themselves that's hard to describe. It's that steadiness, that being comfortable in their own skin. They're harder to rattle. They are just overall feeling better about life. They don't need the same things that they used to. They're more controlled in so many aspects of their life. And I think it's because they've looked at what's actually there. They've given themselves space to, and they're okay with it, and they've worked through what they're not. Start small. Give yourself 20 minutes a day without the brain stimulation. Go for a walk without audio, okay? Sit without a screen, read a book, all right? Journal, just get stuff out on a page. Let the discomfort come up if necessary, and just notice it. Don't let it take you out, okay? Just sit with it.

[16:20] Let it pass. If it fades, great. If it doesn't, think through it, write it out, see what happens. Over time, I think your baseline's going to start shifting back to something quieter, and more importantly, I think it's going to shift back to something more you. The algorithm isn't neutral. It is very engineered. You have to know this. It's been reshaping your emotional state, your attention, your relationship with your own life and others. Probably without you fully realizing how bad it is. That is worth taking very seriously. And I think it's reversible. This video might not do well because of the nature of what it is. It's okay, I tried. And if you want more of this, more than I can go into in a YouTube video where I'm trying to get through it very quickly with you, then you can grab my book. It's called From Dull to Doctor. It is the full blueprint that I wish I had when I was going through this. How to rebuild your mind and your body and your brain and your cognitive baseline

[17:21] and your daily life from the ground up. I cover what I thought was every key aspect of your life and in detail and in a way most people described it as it's like a knowledgeable friend telling you something and that's what my intention was. It's not a lecture, it's not anything like that. Um I wanted to be a good read and there's a lot of links to a lot of good things as well. And also, I made a free 30-day blueprint for you. I'll link that at the top description as well. I do this because I want to meet people with where they're at and I hope this helps. If you enjoyed, if you found value in this, drop a like, comment, I drop another amazing video like this once a week, sometimes twice a week. You don't want to miss it. And if you found value, share this with someone that you care about, one of your loved ones. It's free and it's the least that you can do to help them. And as always, I'm Dr. Matt Jones. Thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next one.
