TITLE: This Ancient Greek practice creates more meaning in your life | Arthur Brooks
VIDEO ID: rSJQf72jlGA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rSJQf72jlGA
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-08-12
DURATION: 53:06
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] Now, the problem with meaning questions, with the big whys of coherence, purpose, and significance, or or or any of the big meaning questions of life, is that they don't have answers. Complex problems don't have distinct solutions. Complex problems simply have an an understanding. You live with complex problems. My car is complicated. I can I I don't know how it works, but but I could I could figure it out. I have the brainpower to get the education to understand once and for all how my car works. My marriage is complex. It's a right-hand side thing. I will never solve my marriage. I never will. Which is why I love my marriage. I don't know if my wife's going to be mad at me this afternoon. I don't know if we're going to have a conflict, cuz I'll never solve it. There's no algorithm. There's no app for that. And that's the thing with these big why questions of life. They're complex. They're mysterious. >> >> And that's what makes them meaningful. My name is Arthur Brooks. I'm a professor and a writer about the science

[01:01] of human happiness. My latest book is The Meaning of Your Life, Finding Purpose in an Age of Emptiness. >> Thank you for watching Big Think. If you'd like to support our work, we encourage you to join our members community. As a member, you'll receive our quarterly print magazine, a beautifully designed collection of the ideas and interviews that matter most. Big Think is for curious people who want to take deep dives into big ideas. To support the media you want to see in the world, go to bigthink.com/membership. And now, back to the interview. The five essential elements of happiness. >> We are meaning-based creatures. By that, I mean that we are evolved to understand the meaning of our lives through the way that we would live an ordinary life. By interacting with other people, by falling in love, by having conflict, by by wondering about the the great beyond,

[02:01] maybe trying to ponder the essence of our existence. All of these things are central to finding meaning. And that was just normal before we were completely distracted all the time, before we were we were shoved headlong into the left hemisphere of our brains. The right hemisphere was working normally and and nobody had to think about it. That's one of the reasons that if I went back 50 years, maybe 30 years, and said, "Are you having a meaning crisis?" People would say, "What are you? Some sort of French intellectual? Of course not. That means nothing to me." I mean, it was only Jean-Paul Sartre smoking a filterless cigarette in a Parisian cafe that would be asking these deep philosophical questions. They were not relevant to most people's lives. But here's the thing, things become relevant when they're scarce, even if we never thought about them before. If the air in this room started to dissipate, I would become incredibly conscious of it very quickly, and it would become a big problem. Now, meaning in ordinary life

[03:02] is like an atmosphere that's losing its oxygen. That's what's happening in our use of technology in our over-engineered culture. It's become incredibly scarce. So, what do we need to do? We could turn back the clock, I suppose. Some people have proposed that. I don't believe it's going to happen, and I don't even want it to happen. Instead, what we need to do is to live in ways that people used to take for granted. We need to live like my great-grandfather, like my father, like I did before the advent of the way that we use technology today, to do the things that came ordinarily to us, but that are actually quite extraordinary today. People want to find the meaning of their lives because they want to be happy. Meaning and happiness are related to each other. And and here's how they're related. Happiness is not a feeling. Feelings and happiness are related like the smell of your turkey is related to your Thanksgiving dinner. The smell of the turkey is evidence of the Thanksgiving dinner. Your happy feelings are evidence of happiness. Happiness is something more tangible. And just like

[04:02] your Thanksgiving dinner, by the way, it has three macronutrients. Your Thanksgiving dinner is a combination of protein, carbohydrates, and fat. Your happiness is a combination of the macronutrients, enjoyment of your life, satisfaction with your accomplishments and achievements, and the meaning of your life. Those are the three macronutrients. Those are the things that people who are really happy, that have high levels of well-being, they have in common that they're good at those things. They pursue those things. They know how to get those things. They enjoy their life a lot. They take a lot of satisfaction in what they do every day, and and they know the meaning of their lives. Those are the things that we need to pay attention to. Now, as a happiness scientist, when I see a big change in happiness for the worse, or I see a big group of people that have a low level of happiness, I know that one of those things is missing. I know that one or more of those macronutrients is not in abundance. So, I start looking for it. Now, when I started looking at young adults under 30 and seeing this incredible happiness crisis that we've

[05:03] seen, which is obvious when you look at the statistics on depression and anxiety, that one or more of those macronutrients is blocked. Is it enjoyment? Nope. There's no evidence that young adults enjoy their lives any more than anybody at any other time. Do they take less satisfaction in their accomplishments? Not my students. Some of my students who are really suffering, they have the highest level of satisfaction cuz they're doing all kinds of cool stuff all the time, way more than most young people did when I was that age. So, that's not it, either. It's meaning. That's when you look at the survey literature, you find that more and more people say, "My life feels meaningless. I don't know what I'm meant to do. What my my life and my relationships don't have a meaningful feeling to them. I feel like I'm living in a simulation and not really digging in in my life, which is the essence of not finding meaning. So, this is how it all hangs together. Sadness and anxiety, which are

[06:03] exploding, they are a a lack of happiness in people's lives. Happiness is enjoyment plus satisfaction plus meaning, and meaning is falling apart. That's the problem that we need to deal with today by living in a different way. Every philosophical and religious tradition, they do things differently, of course, but one of the things that they all have in common is that they're supposed to help us find meaning in our lives. I mean, why would you read Socrates and Aristotle and Plato if you weren't trying to find the deep meaning of things? That was kind of the gig for philosophers and for everybody in wisdom traditions and theologians all throughout time. It's really all about meaning. Now, where it gets interesting is the similarities between the approach of most of these traditions. One of the things that virtually every philosophical and religious tradition of note has in common is that they encourage us to find meaning through what the ancient Greeks called aporia. This is puzzles, open-ended questions,

[07:05] questions that don't have answers. Now, here's how it relates to what we're talking about here. People ask questions all day long and put them into Google or into chat GPT, right? But, these are not meaning questions because they're not open-ended. I defy anybody watching me right now to put into chat GPT, "What would I give my life for?" You'll get back garbage. You'll get back nonsense. It'll It'll It'll start by by kissing up to you. It'll say, "Well, that's a very intelligent question. That's the kind of question that philosophers have asked forever." And it'll give you seven examples of of answers that people have given before. It will not tell you what you've given your life for because it can't. It's not a meaning question. Aporia and every tradition, starting with the ancient Greeks, probably before the ancient Greeks, and in every religious tradition, is to ask questions that don't have clear answers. Why? Why would this lead to meaning? You already know why. Because so doing, you illuminate activity in the right hemisphere of your brain. The why side

[08:06] of your brain, the mystery and meaning side of your brain, is actually stimulated by asking the type of questions that don't have clear and precise answers that you can get from Googling something. That's really, really important. Now, what did the ancient Greeks do? And what is virtually every tradition today still do? It asks you to ponder questions. And through the pondering, you will come to understanding beyond your ability to articulate it. I'll give you an example from another tradition. The Zen Buddhists will actually train junior monks using something called koans. Koans are just riddles. Here's an example of a a koan. A junior monk is walking down a trail in the woods by himself. He sees coming toward him on the trail a senior monk. He asks the senior monk, "Where are you going?" The senior monk says, "I do not know." The junior monk says, "Well, how will you know when you get there?" He says, "I'll know when I get there

[09:08] because not knowing is the most intimate type of knowledge." Now, what that does, it asks you to understand the nature of not knowing and how it actually is a kind of knowing, which doesn't make sense. It feels like nonsense. And yet, the right hemisphere of your brain says there is something in not knowing that is a deep form of knowing. And purposely not knowing something and sitting in the not knowing is a form of knowing. You feel it, don't you? And you can't articulate exactly what that means and why, but that feeling of I get it, I kind of get it, that's the right hemisphere of your brain working. And that's how it's supposed to be. That's how these traditions actually work. You can go live in a Zen Buddhist monastery, I suppose. You can try to join some sort of a club where aporia is the practice of the day like the ancient Greeks, or you can just start asking these deep questions. Here's what I recommend. If you come over to my house for dinner, there's not going to be any phones. There's not going to be any phones at

[10:08] the table. And I'm going to ask you questions like this. What are you most afraid of? Nah-nah. What are you most afraid of? Bring it on. And I want to want to know, you know, are you afraid that you won't be loved? Are you afraid of death? Why? And you're not going to be able to articulate it exactly because these are right-hand side questions, and I'm not doing it just because I'm a professor of this stuff. I'm doing it cuz I want to I want to know the meaning of my life. This is school, these types of questions. Now, here's how you know. If you can put it into Google, if you can put it into Claude or Gemini, and you can get information that's meaningful and makes sense to answer that question, it's not the right kind of question. It really is the kind of that relates to the definition of meaning itself. Meaning is three big why questions. Why do things happen the way that they do, which is coherence.

[11:08] Now, you can answer that with respect to the mind of God, or with the working of science, or if you reject both of those things, maybe with a conspiracy theory. I don't know. The second big why question is why am I doing the stuff that I'm doing? That's purpose. How do I know that I'm making progress in my life? What are my goals and direction? Why am I doing the things that I'm doing? And last but not least is why does my life matter?" That's the love question. That's significance. Think about those questions. Think about those things with the people that you love. Go deep. Watch meaning appear. One of the most complex phenomenon in every person's life, and also one of the phenomena that brings the most meaning, not coincidentally, is falling in love and staying in love. Human romantic love is a deeply complex phenomenon. It's something that we write songs about, but we can't quite completely apprehend. It's nothing that can ever be solved,

[12:08] which is why it feels so incredibly mysterious and meaningful to us, and it's why it's something that almost everybody wants. You know, when people lose a spouse at 80 years old, they're they're liable to fall in love with somebody new at 82. Because we want that. We we get a sense of meaning in life from that. There are other ways as well, but this is one of the most powerful of all. It just turns on the right hemisphere of our brains, and makes us feel meaning when somebody is in love with us, and when we're in love with somebody else as well. The problem is that in an era of complicated problems that have neatly tied up engineering solutions, we've tried to bring to bear technology to solve the problem of romantic love, and we've made it harder, even impossible, even invisible and absent in the lives of a lot of young people today. There are data that come from Jean Twenge at San Diego State University and Jonathan Haidt at the Stern School at New York University that people are falling in love less than they ever have before.

[13:10] People in their 20s today are less likely to be married, less likely to live together, less likely to have sex, less likely to say they're in love than ever before. Why? There's more technology that makes it easier for us to have contact with and to know more people than ever before. It should be easier than it ever was. But it's not. And the reason is, well, you already know the reason. Falling in love is right hemispheric. And the technology that is matching us up with other people is largely left hemispheric. It's a mismatch. It's taking a complex problem and trying to solve it with a complicated solution. Dating apps are getting better and I'm very confident that they're going to be excellent compared to what they are today. I'm involved in some of the projects to make dating apps better. But the one way they're not going to get better is if we substitute for the complex experience of knowing each other in real life with an algorithm that tries to match us with respect to demographics and tastes and opinions. When people fall in love, they feel like

[14:12] they're possessed. They feel like they're not themselves. And And the truth is that they aren't themselves. You know, you can do brain scans on people falling in love and and they look remarkably similar to people who are addicted to methamphetamine. I mean, their brains are working in a very funny way. There's a There's a neurochemical hurricane going on the brains of people who are falling in love. Now Now there's a reason for that. It's not because it's something bad, like getting addicted to meth. It's because it's something good. It's bonding us to another person, ideally somebody to whom you're completely unrelated biologically, and making that person your kin extremely fast. So you better have some serious action going on inside your head so that you can do that. And we do. Here's the way that it works. The way that people start to fall in love starts with attraction. Now, even people who are really sophisticated, they say that look, it's it's, you know, love is blind. You know, we don't care. Yeah, right. The truth of the matter is that we want to be attracted to each other. And the reason is because when somebody

[15:13] is potentially a mate, they're just attractive in the way that they look, the way they sound, the way that they smell. That stimulates um sex hormones, testosterone and estrogen. Both men and women have both. Men have more testosterone, less estrogen. Women have more estrogen, less testosterone, to be sure. But, we both need both actually be attracted to. That's the ignition of falling in love. Now, the next stage of falling in love comes relatively quickly, days or weeks, where that's the feeling of anticipation and and euphoria, where you really want to be around a person. You want to be around the person. It's the person and not just the looks. And this actually involves two uh, neurotransmitters. One is norepinephrine, which is actually a stress hormone produced in the adrenal glands. And then there's dopamine, which is something that we talk about in the process of all addictions and and wanting and learning and liking. What norepinephrine does, it gives you a sense of euphoria when you're exposed to that person or even potentially when you think about that person. A text comes in, ding, and you say, "Is it her?"

[16:14] That sense of euphoria. It's just a text. You give it a lot of significance. The dopamine gives you a sense of anticipation of reward. Once again, it's going to be great when I see that person. Why? Because you're starting to neurochemically bond to the other person who's going to become your kin. It has to be very intense to do that. The third step, which comes later, this is kind of the dark side of falling in love, actually, because it involves a deep dip in serotonin. And And neuroscientists disagree about why this actually happens. It might be because of stress hormones, which will suppress uh, serotonin. But, another hypothesis that I find really plausible, quite compelling, is the idea that serotonin dips because when it does, it makes you ruminate. So, rumination in depression, sad sad rumination, is one of the like the key signs of clinical depression. And And that occurs. I mean, one of the markers of that is is low levels of serotonin in the synapse. This is one of the reasons that people will take selective serotonin reuptake

[17:14] inhibitors. So, you have more serotonin in the synapse, and you tend to ruminate in your sadness less. I'm so stupid, my life is so meaningless, etc. etc. Well, one of the characteristics of falling in love in this third stage is ruminating on the other person, thinking about him, thinking about him. It's like what was that last text that she sent me? What did it What did it say? It was only three words. It was are you up? But, what did it really mean? Did it mean something more significant than that? Did she really care if I was asleep or was she wondering if wouldn't it be nice if you came over to my house or and what you're doing is ruminating because you're bonding to the other person. You're neurochemically fusing with the other person. Ideally, if you're ruminating on each other, this is taking you to a very, very deep level. This is one of the reasons that clinical depression and falling in love at this stage are quite similar, as a matter of fact. Now, what are you trying to get to? Ultimately, what you want is to bond to each other as a kind of kin, as I mentioned before. And And that's associated with a production of oxytocin, also known as the love molecule. It's a binding neuropeptide that functions as a hormone. Oxytocin is

[18:15] like, this is my person. And it has a cousin that's vasopressin. And vasopressin is, I will defend this person. That's family. That's what it comes down to. When you have a baby and you have eye contact with your newborn baby, there's just oxytocin flowing that's bonding you. And And And when you fall in love with somebody and you've gone through the whole cycle and and you become kin with one another and you want to get married now, then then this oxytocin is saying, this is my person now and forever. We're like wood storks or Canada geese. We're going to be monogamous now and forever. It doesn't always work out that way. But, but that's what you feel. That's what you're supposed to feel, which is why you're willing to go up to the altar and say till the day I die, baby. Till the day I die. That's what oxytocin is supposed to make you feel. And that's the process that we actually go through. We are we are made neurochemically to love each other romantically and to pair bond one-to-one forever, if we can. When first started studying romantic love,

[19:16] I mean, it's amazing. It's amazing. It's a miracle, as a matter of fact. Um but I had this one nagging question. What about people who don't have it? You know, I don't know. Priests and nuns, people who don't find the one, people whose spouse dies and they never pair up with somebody else. There are a lot of people out there who are single, for sure. Does this just mean they're out of luck? Well, there's an answer to that. And that answer actually comes from a great study that was undertaken by researchers at at Harvard University. It's called the Harvard Study of Adult Development that looks at people over a an 85-year period. And it looks at how they lived their lives to predict whether they were healthy and happy when they were old. It's kind of like a crystal ball. And some of it's pretty obvious. Smoking, drinking, exercise, diet. Um learning, dealing with your problems. But number one on a walk was love. And there were two types of love that gave people the deep mystery and meaning in life when they were old. Number one was, sure enough, romantic love, ideally in a

[20:16] lifelong marriage, if that was possible. But the other type was deep deep friendship, deep deep platonic friendship. That this gave a sense of mystery and meaning as well, and deep deep happiness as well. So, here's the bottom line. A lifelong marriage is great if you can get it, but if you can't, lifelong friendship, or deep deep friendship, an understanding of one person to another, two souls, the perfect friendship that Aristotle talked about, where you you have a common love of other things, and you walk together shoulder to shoulder into the future. You know that kind of useless but beautiful friendship you can have with another person. That brings it, too. It turns out that's that's another path. One of the ways that people commonly find meaning, and always have, is what's called transcendence. And that means to transcend yourself. Look, Mother Nature puts you into a psychodrama of your own life where you're the star. My money, my car, my food, my television shows, my lunch, my me

[21:17] me me me It's just so boring. It's completely tedious. And yet we're obsessed with it with the quotidian details of our lives. I noticed at one point that at my university, the most popular undergraduate class is astronomy. Introduction to astronomy. And and they line up out the door for this astronomy class. And and and I didn't know why because they're not astronomers. They're English majors and classics majors and you know, And so I asked one of the students at one point. I said, "So, why do you all love the astronomy class so much?" And she said, "I actually don't know, but it's Thursday mornings at 9:00 and and when I go into class, inevitably I'm all stressed out because I you know, had a big argument with my mom and and I think I might be breaking up with my boyfriend and I'm not doing so well in class. And an hour and a half later, I come out and I say, 'I'm a speck on a speck on a speck.' And I'm at peace. I'm at peace because I can see myself from the vantage point of things that are bigger than me.

[22:19] That's transcendence. Now, there are a lot of ways to get that kind of transcendence, but here's how you don't get it by looking in the mirror. Literally looking in the mirror or figuratively by looking at your notifications on social media. The problem with modern tech is it's a big mirror on ourselves and it makes transcendence impossible. It brings us down to the base level of our lives. It makes life profoundly, grindingly boring because it's all about these little things that What do I What am I eating and what supplements am I using and are my biceps big enough and it's just it's tedious. And and and it makes it impossible for us to get the peace and perspective that we actually need to use our brains properly and to understand the meaning of life or the meaning of life to find us. So, one of the great things that people do who have a lot of meaning in their lives is they go out and they find ways to transcend. They have ways to transcend themselves. Now, one way is to look upward at things that are greater than we are and stand in awe. And the other way is to look outward to people who are not ourselves.

[23:21] Those are the two forms of transcendence. Vertical transcendence is typically practiced through religious faith, for example. I'm a traditionally religious person. I'm a Catholic. And you know, I actually go to mass every day. And one of the reasons that I do that is that I need to transcend myself. I need to get away from myself. I need a peace and perspective that I actually get. I also happen to believe that these ideas are true. But the transcendence as per se is central to my pursuit of meaning and therefore to the happiness that I have in my life. Other people get that through a Vapassana meditation practice or or or studying the fugues of Johann Sebastian Bach or walking for an hour before dawn without devices or studying the Stoic philosophers. There are lots of ways to do that. But you need something. Another way is to look outward toward other people and to serve other people without any self-interest at all. This is a very beautiful thing and it's an incredibly well-studied thing where people understand their lives better when they're serving other people, when they

[24:22] have a sense of being needed. They have a a certain kind of bliss that they can't describe in any other way. The great social psychologist Brett Diessner, he talks about moral elevation. When you serve other people and and you feel a kind of a warmth in your chest and almost an otherworldliness. That otherworldliness, that's right hemispheric activity. And that's the transcendence that we need. But we have to figure out a way to do that. So, I spend a lot of time with my students talking about how do you find your faith? How do you learn how to meditate? How do you get into activities that serve other people and are not just all about you. That's a lot of what I spend my time teaching. When people are looking for transcendence, many of them have a background with a traditional religion. And so, it's a natural place for them to look is the faith of their youth. Or or maybe they're just interested in religion. The barrier that a lot of them have to that, however, is they don't they don't feel it. You know, it's like I just don't know if I I don't really feel it. And so, it's sort of hypocritical. Am I not supposed

[25:23] to go to a house of worship when I don't feel it? So, we live in a in an age of feelings and authenticity. But remember, feelings are just activity of the limbic system. There's a system of alarms to tell you about threats and opportunities. Feelings are liars, man. This is just the workings of your brain at any given moment. Feelings are not authentic or true to anything that's metaphysically important, anything that with respect to the way that you want to design your life. That's a big misapprehension that we've been told and that we've told ourselves. So, what do I tell my students if they're actually looking for a way to understand faith, maybe incorporate it into their lives? Fundamentally, the experience that people have of a religious faith has three parts to it. One is indeed the feeling that you have. A second is the beliefs that you hold quite consciously. And the third is the decisions that you make to actually practice that faith. Because a faith that's completely not practiced is not much of a faith at all. And one that's bereft of belief, there's not much there, either. And you want to feel

[26:24] something sometimes, at least. Here's the problem. A lot of people think that if even if they agree with that, that they can't have a religious faith unless they first feel it, and then they come to believe it, and only then to be authentic with themselves, would they practice it. It turns out that's exactly the wrong order. If you want any sort of religion in your life, it's the same way as if you wanted to stay married in your life. Anybody's been married for any length of time knows that it doesn't go with respect to what you feel at any given moment. I've been married 35 years. If it were just about feelings, I wouldn't have been married 35 minutes because that's probably when we had our first argument. On the contrary, you start not with feelings, you start with practicing. I practice my marriage every single day. I don't go home and say, "Honey, I've been loyal to you 99% of the time." That's also known as failure. I practice it 100% of the time. Most of the time I believe in my marriage and some of the time I feel it.

[27:25] That's the way that these relationships actually work if they want to give you a sense of transcendence. This is also true in religion. Figure out something that you're going to practice or at least try something and practice it. It's okay. What will happen is that you will come to believe it some of the time, maybe even a lot of the time, and then occasionally you'll feel it. And then it'll be good enough. One of the things that young people say to me a lot is with respect to work and their career, they want to know what they're meant to do. I don't know what I'm meant to do. And that's a meaning question, obviously. It has the word meaning in it. What am I meant to do? To a very large extent, that's also the quest for calling. Your calling is what you're meant to do. It's this kind of cosmic mysterious thing that that you feel like if you happen across it, then then you know the angels will, you know, will come into your life and there will be the sound of harps and and and and you'll know. It's not like that, but calling is a real thing. And calling

[28:27] truly is important with respect to the meaning of life. Now, when I say that, I don't mean a job because a calling can be raising your children. A calling can be volunteer work. A calling can be something that you do with family and friends. It has to be something generative, something beautiful, something that creates value whether they pay you or not. And that's the most important thing that we needed to talk about. How are you supposed to create value that's unique to the way that you find meaning in your life? That's what calling is. Now, I've studied it for years with respect to professions. And you know, I wanted to know, do people find more calling when they make more money or less? It turns out that's irrelevant. Do people feel more calling or less when they have an education? That's irrelevant, too. That washes out in the statistical analysis. What matters is two factors. Number one is when you feel like you're earning your success. You feel like you're creating value with your life and value in the lives of other people. You're recognized and acknowledged for the the value that you're creating.

[29:27] You're earning your success. And number two is that you're serving somebody. You're serving somebody who actually needs you. You're needed. That's what it comes down to. I know people who have jobs they don't particularly like, but they feel that they're a calling because they're creating value and they're needed. That's what it comes down to. Now, ideally you like it, too. And so, I do a whole lot of work on on how to enjoy because once again, meaning and enjoyment are different macronutrients of happiness. And so, you ideally will get lots of meaning from your work, but also lots of enjoyment from your work. But those are different problems, as it turns out. And so, I have to work on those two dimensions separately. But for the meaning part, it's all about earn success and serving other people. Now, the careers that tend to have a lot of meaning, they tend to be intrinsic in their satisfaction. And that's a distinction with extrinsic in their satisfaction. I know it sounds like I'm splitting hairs, but I'm really not. Intrinsic means that there's a a sense of meaning that comes from what you're doing inherently. That's completely apart from what they do to

[30:29] compensate you. Extrinsic means that the motivation for what you're doing is coming from, you know, pay and benefits and prestige, for example, or the power that actually brings to you. Most careers have both to a certain extent. Great when they do, to be sure, but intrinsic motivation is way more important than extrinsic motivation. If you don't feel like you're creating value inherently, but you're getting paid lots of money, you're not going to feel like you have a calling. You just aren't. It's not going to be giving you a sense of meaning in your life. Callings are careers that have are full of intrinsic motivation, intrinsic value. These are a subjective career because they can come in almost anything. You you know, you might be putting on roofs on houses for you and it might be teaching classes for me. It's subjective. There's nothing that people can say on the outside. The stuff that comes extrinsically with pay and benefits and power and fame, that's objective because people can measure it from the outside. What you want is intrinsic satisfaction from a subjective career. Now, that also

[31:30] means a career path, which is really important. Um a lot of what we teach in our society today, in our economy, in our culture, is that a good career is highly linear. It's one thing after another thing and you jump from one thing to another because it's fancier, it pays better, it has more power, whatever it happens to be. But the truth of the matter is that a subjective career that's intrinsically motivated is largely a spiral for a lot of people, where it's of your own imagination. And that might mean after college, I'm going to work for four or five years and then I'm going to take seven or eight years and work part-time cuz I'm raising my children, then I'm going to go back and work full-time again, but doing something different. And And it all coheres inside my head because it's all part of my calling itself. So, what I'm saying is that we need to be paying attention to earn success and we need to be paying attention to serving other people and and build it our own way because ultimately a sense of meaning is a very personal thing. And if we're taking cues from this book or

[32:31] that class or this school or that counselor, I'm sorry, it's not likely to actually fit into the career that has the most meaning and it truly is a calling for each one of us. Young people get a lot of bad advice about their careers. And and a lot of the worst advice that I hear actually is at their graduation. I've done a lot of graduation speeches and so I've heard a lot of graduation speeches as well. And um usually it's like one of two pieces of advice. Number one is you know, you're all going out into the world, go do something that's really fun and you'll never work a day in your life. Now, that speaker is probably a you know, a a billionaire cardboard box magnet who's so severely workaholic that he's had three heart attacks and two divorces before the age of 40. So, careful who you're taking advice from. But it's bad advice on its face as well because that's not has no depth to it. The second piece of advice that you get is from, you know, somebody, usually a politician, who will say, "My generation screwed up the whole world, so it's all

[33:32] up to you guys. You know, go save the world. No pressure, right? Bad advice, too. Because that's not something that that that's basically saying sacrifice yourself, be a martyr for the whole world. And neither one of those things actually gives you a sense of sense of meaning through necessarily earning your success and serving other people. I have found in my research that the best way to predict earning your success and serving other people and something that will give you long-term longevity to what you're trying to do in your spiral career is looking for the thing that grips you the most. Looking for the thing that's actually most interesting to you. You will create the most value when it's most interesting. Now, there are a lot of cases where people are not super interested in their jobs. And and I don't give people advice quit on the first day that it's boring, on the contrary, because everything is boring from time to time. But the truth of the matter is that weirdly, and this has actually been shown in a lot of studies, that when you're serving other people as much as you possibly can, when you're transcending yourself

[34:33] laterally toward other people that weirdly, mysteriously, your job almost always gets more interesting. One of the most efficacious ways to illuminate the right-hand side of your brain such that you can experience meaning is by exposing yourself to beauty. Beauty is a largely right hemispheric experience. This is one of the reasons that people will hear a beautiful melody and cry. If you really like poetry, you can't quite describe it, but the way that the poet puts the words together it it chokes you up. It gives you an emotional response to something and the fact that it's ineffable, it's beyond your ability to describe what just happened to you means it's a right hemispheric experience. It's deep and mysterious. Beauty is critically important for for for understanding meaning in life, but there's a problem and this compounds the problem of shoving ourselves into the left hemispheres of our brain. The technologically mediated world is not beautiful. It just isn't. Now, there are

[35:33] some pretty objective and and and persuasive studies in my opinion that show that for example as we become more technologically adroit and and our world has become more engineered, the music has actually gotten less beautiful. We know for sure that natural beauty is rarer. If the average 12-year-old spends 4 to 7 minutes outside, which according to John Haidt is the case, then they're largely going to be experiencing the great outdoors through screen. You don't go to Yosemite and see El Capitan, you see it on your screensaver. And I'm sorry, your brain knows the difference. That's not passing the Turing test of actual beauty that will illuminate the right hemisphere of your brain. On the contrary, you know perfectly that it's just a representation of something beautiful, which is also not beautiful. The truth of the matter is that you need to experience something in real life to capture it in all of its magnitude. Then we come to the the scarcest area of beauty of all in our modern culture, which I believe is moral beauty. There's

[36:35] a lot of literature that shows that when people are exposed to acts of moral beauty, when they when they witness people giving of themselves in and magnificent and heroic ways, it's just this ineffable experience. It's this deep experience that that that that gives them a sense of meaning in their lives. You know, when people were when they learned about Mother Teresa, for example, she was a an unknown nun working in the slums in and Calcutta, but when the British journalist Malcolm Muggeridge inadvertently made her famous, why did people get so interested in this nun in Calcutta? It's because understanding something about her life made their life feel meaningful. You know, people would would would read a book about Mother Teresa or see her in a documentary and they would burst into tears at the the beauty of what she was doing. Why? Because they were finding meaning in their own lives. Well, you're not going to find it on social media. Or not very easily. I mean, what do you find in in in online forums? You're going to find conflict.

[37:35] You're going to find psychopathic behavior. You're going to find predation. You're going to find people who are treating each other horribly. One of the things that we know very clearly from from research on modern internet activity is the more time you spend online, the less empathetic you are, the less remorseful that you actually are, the more narcissistic that you are, the more Machiavellian you are. If you want to torque your personality toward what psychologists call the dark triad, which is characteristic of predators, it's a good idea to spend as much time online as possible, as a matter of fact, cuz you'll lose the art of being human. And that's probably the greatest cost in beauty of all. One of my favorite studies that talks about beauty is called nine beautiful things. And what it asked participants in the study to do was to write down nine beautiful things over a 7-day period and contemplate those things. And And three of those things were natural beauty, three of those things were moral beauty, you know, the beauty of other people, and three of those things were beauty in

[38:36] general. Write them down and think about those things. And And what the researchers wanted to know was how it affected the people that were contemplating those nine beautiful things. And sure enough, when people were contemplating these nine beautiful things, their life just felt deeper, their life felt richer, their life felt like it had more purpose, more significance. They understood their lives better. The truth of the matter is that that helped them understand the meaning of their own lives. There's a mystery in my field about why people are so drawn toward moral ugliness. And And And in a way it really isn't much of a mystery. We have a negativity bias built into us by evolution. Um the truth is that we notice uh negative things more than positive things. Many neuroscientists believe that we have more brain tissue dedicated to negative emotions than to positive emotions. Why? Because it's important that negative things get our attention faster than positive things. Positive things are nice to have. Negative things will take your life if you're not careful. So, we're evolved to pay attention to things that make us fearful and angry and disgusted

[39:37] and sad. Those things literally grab our attention. That's why we're so fascinated by negative things in life today. They They They They stimulate us in a way. We don't always turn away from them. On the contrary, we might actually turn toward them because of this negativity bias that we have. But that's a bad habit. There's plenty of bad things that will get our attention that we should pay attention to because it's important for our safety and security. But there's a lot out there that we turn into kind of a form of perverse entertainment, which is a a use of our brains in a way that mother nature really, I dare say, never anticipated. On the internet, you can find all kinds of ugliness. In the modern entertainment economy, you can as well. And we find some pretty alarming trends. You find that the the main consumers of real crime drama are are women under 30. A huge majority of the people who are watching the the slash-em and murder-em mysteries documentaries that are proliferating across the streamers on television are young women who never experience these things, but

[40:38] but treat this as a form of entertainment. These are not coincidentally the same people who are most likely to be sad and anxious and lonely and depressed. We find on the male side, they're most attracted to internet trolling, to to to insulting and getting into conflict with other people on the internet, especially on social media sites after news articles. That that that this is something that that predominates in that area. This kind of aggressive trollery that we that we see as well. These things are not innocuous. On the contrary, you're being polluted by these things. If you're involved in trollery or just sitting on the sidelines looking at it eating popcorn, that's bad for you. The research is very clear. You will be more anxious, you will be ang- more angry, and you will be more depressed because it's affecting your brain. Similarly, if every night you settle down after a long day at work to have a pint of Häagen-Dazs and watch murderers on Netflix, well, that's bad for you as well. You're This is neurocognitive programming. You need something that's actually more transcendent that will

[41:40] elevate you, as a matter of fact. I realize that this is not something that people always want to hear because they want something that gives them a sense of escapism and relief, but your brain is tricking you, and technology is fooling you as well. The first noble truth of Buddhism, called Dukkha in Sanskrit, is that life is suffering. It's a characteristic of life. Most people treat that as a bug, not a feature of life, and think, "Wouldn't it be great if I can set my my up in just the right way where I can get rid of my suffering. Well, you can't. And if you could, you shouldn't because you'd be in danger. The truth of the matter is that negative emotions are part of your alarm system that negative emotions tell you that there are threats in the world around you. They're supposed to be aversive. Suffering in this way, painful emotions exist to keep you alive. If you didn't feel fear, for example, you wouldn't jump out of the way of an oncoming car and you'd be dead in a week, most probably. You

[42:42] need bad feelings. Bad feelings are an alarm system to keep you alive. Negative experiences are also important. More important, as a matter of fact, because these are the source of learning and growth. I've asked people for years, "How did you understand the meaning of your life and your resilience? How did you understood what made you who you are as a person?" They don't talk about that week at the beach in Ibiza or going away with their parents to Disneyland as children. They talk about when my mother passed away and I didn't know what I was going to do, when I was I fell in love with somebody and they left me, when my business went bankrupt, when I got tossed out of school. They tell you about hard things. They tell me about difficult experiences as as a source of their learning and their growth as people. Now, the greatest I think injustice that we perpetrated on young adults today is telling them that when they're feeling sad and anxious, that there's something wrong with them. On the contrary, I tell my students, "Look, you're getting a master's degree. If you're not feeling sad and lonely and anxious sometimes, you need therapy

[43:42] cuz you're doing a hard thing and you're doing it on purpose. Now, now I get it. It can be too much. It can be exaggerated. It can It can rise to the level of a psychiatric disorder and and and thank God for treatment and and analysis and medication, which has saved the lives of people in my family. But the idea that being sad and anxious is evidence of a pathology, of being broken, no, it's evidence of being alive and only when we understand in real life experiences that are aversive, will we truly tap into one of the greatest sources of meaning in life itself. Suffering is sacred. And we need to start treating it as such. People have been arguing about the persistence of pain and suffering in life for the longest time. The first is the idea that that we're mismatched to the current environment. That you know, we're made to be noble savages of some type. You know, we we should go back to 250,000 years ago and live in the tribe. That's how we

[44:43] should actually live in and bands of 30 to 50 individuals and then we'd be running naked and free and everything would be great. That's nonsense, by the way. You know, if you want to find people really, really, really stressed out, go back 250,000 years ago cuz life was pretty nasty, brutish, and short. Another is this idea that that that we need negative emotions as an alarm system. That actually has a lot of credence to it and a lot of neuroscientific backing. The truth of the matter is that your negative emotions are an alarm system and they're supposed to be uncomfortable. They're supposed to be terrible so that you will be paying attention to something that's a threat to your well-being, maybe your safety and you can avoid it. And that's a really good thing. Your four emotions that are negative are fear, anger, disgust, and sadness and all of them exist and have evolved neurophysiologically into different parts of your limbic system to produce those emotions on purpose as a way to keep you alive. So, that is a very plausible hypothesis. I think it's actually unimpeachable as a matter of fact. And the last is that you need

[45:45] you need suffering because suffering is part of what makes life meaningful and good and makes you effective as a person. It gives you learning and growth. Now, some of this literature is pretty interesting. It comes from, for example, the work on great artists. We all know that artists tend to be temperamental and many are depressive as a matter of fact. Well, one of the ways that we can we can link the sadness and anxiety of artists with with productive output is by looking at what they write and then looking at what they're doing while they're writing. For example, the great maybe the greatest classical composer who ever lived, Ludwig van Beethoven, um he was a prolific letter writer and he suffered a lot, by the way. I mean, he was going deaf when he was pretty young man. He lived 56 years old. He was profoundly deaf near the end of his life and was writing um so deaf that he he could only imagine what his music sounded like. He would hold a pencil in his teeth and connect it to the soundboard on his piano so that the vibrations would enter his

[46:45] cranium and he'd get an idea. And his friends thought that he was going to commit suicide. It was horrible. He was a letter writer to everybody talking about how sad he was, how afraid he was about his future. And what social scientists have found is that in the in his depths is when his greatest compositions appeared. That he was turning his pain into beauty. He was turning his pain into meaning in a very, very profound way. Now, I'm not Beethoven. I'm not, but I do know that creative activity is correlated with a lot of activity in something called the ventral lateral prefrontal cortex, which is also correlated with ruminative sadness. And so, you can't pull these things apart. Is what it comes down to. A meaningful life is one that actually has suffering. Now, there's another area of the literature that's really worth paying attention to, which is the literature on pain, straight-up pain. People who specialize in treating back pain, one of the things that they'll tell you,

[47:46] and I know this firsthand cuz my back hurts, is that if you baby it, it will get worse. In other words, the best approach to back pain is one where you treat it logically without medication that's going to hurt you, you also exercise a lot and you accept the fact that your back hurts. Those are the three parts to treating back pain. The same thing is true with the pain in your life. It's normal. It's a normal functioning of your limbic system. You don't try to avoid it. Here's the formula on turning pain into meaning. And this relates pain to suffering. Suffering equals pain multiplied by resistance to pain. And I see the physical pain or or psychological pain, emotional pain. Suffering is your pain multiplied by your resistance to pain. Now, when you feel pain, which you will because you're a human being walking on the earth and you're supposed to and that's evidence that you're alive, congratulations, you have two choices. You can try to eliminate the pain

[48:46] or you can lower your resistance to the pain. Every major religion, most philosophies teach non-resistance. Why? Because they know that that eliminating pain only goes so far and once you push it too far, it becomes a bad thing. It makes it harder for you to understand the meaning of your life. Here's how you know if you're in the right zone. Here's what you find from the, you know, the great and enlightened. Here's what I saw in the life of my beloved mother-in-law when she was bedridden near the end of her life in tremendous pain. Her pain was high, but her suffering was low because her resistance was low. That's how to think about it. Something happens to you and it's tremendously painful. You can try to eliminate it, you can try to ignore it, you can try to mute it, you can try to numb it, or you can say, "Bring it on. Bring it on." Watch your suffering fall and your meaning rise even if your pain is high. That's the mark of an elite athlete of meaning. In ordinary life today, we're used to

[49:49] one-and-done solutions to our problems. This is one of the reasons that internet influencers are so unbelievably popular because they're telling you if you take this pill or this potion or do this exercise or or or or do this one thing in your relationship that is going to change everything. This is one of the reasons that the most popular form of internet teasing is to say the one weird trick that will lower your blood pressure. Because we want a one-and-done. Now, the biggest problem facing us today for our happiness is the lack of meaning. It is. It's what lies behind the explosion, the epidemic of depression and anxiety. We want that meaning. And so therefore we want something that's going to give us this meaning in life. That doesn't work. The truth is that most of the other things don't work for your blood pressure, your relationships, or your biceps either. Those are lies. You're being tricked. The good news is this. We know the way for you to find the meaning of your life. And here's even better

[50:50] news. It's a project that's a really fun project that you get to work on for the rest of your life. This is an assignment to live a meaningful life step by step by step. You know what this is? This is This is a pilgrimage. This is where you're walking toward a goal and as you walk you make progress and you feel more alive and you feel life is more meaningful and who knows you get 70, 80, 90 years to do it? How wonderful is that? The best news of the day is that there is not a quick fix for this. The best news of the day is that there is a fix for this that's a life worth living. And the way that we do that is by digging into the parts of our lives that are in real life, that are motivated by love, that seek not just the physical things but the metaphysical things as well. We have a guidebook for doing it. I've tried to make my book a guidebook for doing it but all of the great and ancient texts are the guidebook for doing this. What we have to do is to divorce ourselves from the from the illusion, from the false lure that there

[51:53] is a way to distract ourselves and that suddenly at some point there'll be a flash of lightning and we'll all feel better. Wrong. We need to put down the devices most of the time that are leading us into this false way of thinking. We need to take up an old style way of life as opposed to the one-and-done solution. And by the way, other people will know we're on that path, too. They'll say, "What are you doing that's different?" And you'll say, "I'm on a pilgrimage toward finding the meaning of my life. And every day it becomes more apparent to me. And every day I have more happiness, I have more joy, and I want to share it with you." >> Four times a year, we print a magazine worth putting your phone down for. Big Think's premium print magazine is built with custom artwork and expert insight from the world's biggest thinkers.

[52:53] No AI slop, no rage bait, just big ideas for curious people. Support the media you want to see in the world. Go to bigthink.com/membership to join.
