TITLE: The honest (and hidden) side effects of GLP-1s | David Linden
VIDEO ID: TShHIawV9yU
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TShHIawV9yU
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-07
DURATION: 16:00
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] We have an evolutionary history. Through most of our time as humans, there have been intermittent famines. Food has often been scarce. Food service corporations override our natural inclinations to eat and stop eating with specially engineered foods, exploiting this ancient circuit in our brains that says, "Pack on the fat. Pack on the sweet so that you can survive to live another day." I'm David Linden. I'm a professor of neuroscience at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. For many years, my laboratory has studied neuroplasticity, that is, how the brain and the nervous system are changed as the result of experience in the world. How hunger can be hacked. So, we think of eating and hunger as being a very straightforward thing. Oh, yeah, I feel a little hungry. I eat something. Now, I don't want to eat

[01:01] anymore, but it's really complicated and it involves a lot of continual dialogue between the body and the mind using both the senses that are pointed out at the world and the senses that are pointed inward at the body. So, if you can imagine walking down the street in New York City, you're a little hungry and you you smell some pizza. That smells good. And and the first thing you're doing is you're making a decision. Am I hungry? Do I want to go seek out where this odor is coming from? Oh, yes, I do. So, you're using interoceptive information to say, "Yes, my stomach is not distended and full of nutrients and I feel hungry. It's been a while since I last ate, so I'm interested in this idea." You're using your memory to say, "Oh, yes, I remember that I like pizza. That's a food that I enjoy." And so, these smells are bringing up positive associations and that is influencing your decision to go seek it out. And then, let's say you order a slice, and you have it in your hand, and you're

[02:01] looking at it, and you're seeing it, so you're taking in information with your eyes, you're smelling it, and then you're making a decision. Do I want to put this in my mouth or not? And if it smells a little off, if you sniff it and you think it might have spoiled or or the oil is rancid or something bad, you're going to say, "Well, no, maybe I won't put that in my mouth after all." But really, eating is a series of decisions. So, now let's say you've taken a bite, and you go, "Oh, that's delicious. Yes, I'm I'm I'm I'm tasting the salt, I'm tasting the fat, I get that nice yeasty thing from the crust. There's also mouth feel in my mouth. Am I going to swallow this bite?" And you're saying, "Oh, yes, this is palatable food. There's nothing wrong with it." And so, I won't spit it out, I'll swallow it. That's yet another decision. And then you're going on eating your slice, perhaps you're walking down the street, and you have to make a decision. Am I getting full? This slice is enormous. Am I going to Am I going to finish it, or

[03:01] am I going to chuck some of it in the trash and leave it be? And that decision uses several different streams of information coming from your body. It's using fast neural signals from your stomach that are saying, "How distended is my stomach? How much is it swollen as a result of food filling it up?" And it is also using fast information from the stomach. There are cells in the lining of the stomach that evaluate the nutrient content of the food. This is why you can't just drink a lot of water, for example, distend your stomach, and then suppress your appetite. That doesn't work as a diet strategy. Your stomach knows what's inside. It can tell the difference between water and food, and it can even tell what kind of food is there. Is it fatty? Is it proteinaceous? Is it carbs? That sort of information. Saying, "Oh, yes, there are proteins there. There are fats there. There's a fairly high level of them." And these are signals that go rapidly to your brain and inform the decision,

[04:04] "Should I terminate this meal and stop eating or should I should I keep going a little while longer?" And then, say 20 minutes later, when you are making a decision, "Do I want to eat again?" There are yet other sensors in not your stomach, but in the first part of your small intestine, that are evaluating the nutrient content of the food as it passes there and saying, "You know, I just ate. I have plenty of nutrients. I have a feeling of fullness. I'm not going to eat again for a while." How does that happen? Well, that is a slow hormonal signal. And when food is sensed by particular neurons in the lining of the small intestine, they secrete a hormone. And the hormone is called glucagon-like peptide-1 or GLP-1. And this hormone has several effects. It acts on receptors in the stomach to slow

[05:04] gastric motility, so your stomach empties less quickly. But more importantly, it goes to centers in your brain that control your appetite and they suppress your appetite for tens of minutes or an hour or two afterwards. So, we all know that if you put sweet food in your mouth, it tastes sweet. And that the reason for that is that on your tongue and in your oral cavity, there are special sensors for sugars. But what most people don't know is that there are similar sensors for sugars actually in your stomach and in your small intestines. And those sensors send information to your brain to guide decisions like, "Should I stop eating food right now?" Curiously though, while artificial sweeteners, that are widely used in sodas and other foods, they do a

[06:06] very good job of mimicking real sugar for the sweet sensors that are in your oral cavity, they don't fool the sensors that are in your stomach and your intestines because those in sensors are molecularly different. So, what that means is when you eat artificial sweeteners, there's a mismatch. Your mouth is telling you, "Oh, this is sugar." But your gut is saying, "Uh, no, I don't think so. This isn't real sugar." And as a consequence, your brain is getting conflicting signals, and this is probably some of the reason why artificial sweeteners are really not a very effective strategy for losing weight. If you haven't been living under a rock for the last few years, you've heard that there are very popular diet drugs that are based upon the hormone GLP-1. Now, GLP-1 is a class of molecule called a peptide. It's a short bit of a protein. And these peptides are broken

[07:07] down very quickly in your bloodstream. So, when your small intestine secretes GLP-1, that signal is only acting on your brain very briefly. And so, you would need to inject many times a day, and it it's not wouldn't be an effective drug. But some clever chemists at the drug company Novo Nordisk realized that you could take the natural GLP-1 molecule and hang chemical groups off the side. In particular, you could hang fatty acids off the side. And these fatty acids cause this GLP-1-like molecule then to bind to a protein in the blood called albumin. And when it's bound to albumin, it's much more resistant to being degraded by enzymes, and it's much more resistant to being immediately excreted by the kidney. As a result, while natural GLP-1 acts for only minutes, this modified GLP-1 that makes a GLP-1 based drug can suppress appetite for a

[08:08] very, very long time. It can live for a long time in the bloodstream. And as a consequence, you can use it to make a drug that you inject once a week and suppresses appetite strongly. I'm talking about things like semaglutide, which is known as Wegovy or Ozempic or tirzepatide, which is known as Zepbound or Mounjaro. And these drugs, by mimicking this natural signal, are very effective at suppressing appetites, and people are losing typically between 12 and 17% of their body weight after taking a once-a-week injection of these drugs over many weeks. But, they seem to be even better than that. In other words, if you compare the health benefits that you can measure from people who are taking GLP-1 drugs, it seems that there are beneficial effects above and beyond what you would predict from just the amount of weight they're losing. And we

[09:09] don't entirely know why this happens, but it makes sense biologically because the receptor for the hormone GLP-1, which is also going to be activated by these drugs, it's not just in your stomach, and it's not just in your brain. It's in all kinds of organs. It's in your heart. It's in your kidneys. It's in your liver. It's in all kinds of places, and it's doing something good there. We don't entirely know what that is, but it's probably some sort of anti-inflammatory effect that provides benefit beyond just what the weight loss is doing. GLP-1 based weight loss drugs aren't perfect. They have a lot of benefits, but they have some side effects. Some people feel nauseated, some people feel gastrointestinal distress. Sometimes people feel brain fog or a loss of energy on them. And the newer generations of weight loss drugs that that are being developed right now may help to make those side effects

[10:10] uh better. The other thing is that uh when you eat less, you don't just lose fat mass, you also lose muscle mass. So, you got to be really careful. Uh if you're losing weight on a GLP-1 drug, you want to go to the gym and do load-bearing exercise to keep your muscle mass up. You want to make sure that you're consuming enough protein to allow your muscles to be able to continue to to stay at a at a reasonable size. So, some of these problems may only emerge when we see people using them for years and years and years. And you have to use them for years and years and years because they only work as long as you consume them. You go on a GLP-1 drug, you use it for a year, you go off the drug, you're going to gain all the weight back. It doesn't seem to have a perf- permanent reversal effect. When these drugs were first developed, if you would ask to me as a neuroscientist, would these drugs that suppress appetite also suppress

[11:12] the other kinds of rewards that people tend to overdo, like uh alcohol or uh drugs of abuse or even compulsive shopping or gambling, all of which activate the brain's reward circuitry, I would have guessed no. I would have said there's going to be a separate circuit for appetite, and there are reasons to keep that apart from the general reward circuitry. But, the indications are that this is not entirely the case. So, it's early days, but there are promising indications that the GOP that one based weight loss drugs have some effectiveness for helping people to control their alcohol consumption, and to help them get off of psychoactive drugs, and maybe even to deal with compulsive behaviors that are making problems in their life like compulsive shopping, or

[12:14] compulsive gambling. It's going to be really interesting to see how this plays out in research in the next few years. So, there are some really interesting things that have come out in the last few years in body to brain signaling that have implications for weight loss. One of them has to do with exercise. We know that when you exercise intensively, it stimulates appetite. And so, some people think, "Well, you know, I might go to the gym and work out real hard, but then I'm going to be a real hungry, and then I'm going to eat a lot of food, and maybe there won't be a net benefit." It seems to be though that intensive exercise does have a net benefit. The amount that it stimulates your appetite doesn't entirely compensate for the amount of weight that you burn through the intensive exercise. Why is that? Well, part of it seems to be that when you have very intensive exercise, you produce a metabolite called lactate. It

[13:17] becomes conjugated in your body with an amino acid called phenylalanine, and this conjugated compound seems to act through a rather complicated biochemical cascade in the body to get to the brain to suppress appetite itself. So, intensive exercise really does seem to be a good thing to do. Very few people can lose all the weight they want to lose from intensive exercise itself, but it is very definitely a benefit. And of course, it has myriad benefits well beyond weight loss and looking good. It has benefits for for your mood. It has benefits for maintaining your cognitive function as you age. There's all kinds of great reasons to want to exercise intensively, but weight loss is one of them. Since 1960, the average person in the United States is 27 lb heavier. That's a lot. Why why is that? It's not that the genetics of people in the United States

[14:18] has changed. It's not like there's a toxin or or there's a change in our metabolism. The reason for this is the people who are making our highly processed foods as we find both in restaurants and also in the supermarket have laboratories where they figure out how to manipulate our appetite systems in our bodies and brains in order to get us to overeat. And we have an evolutionary history, right? Through most of our time as humans, there have been intermittent famines. Food is often been scarce. So, it has made sense in those situations. If you come across a very highly caloric fatty food or something really sweet, it made star sense to snarf it all down and to put on a little weight so that the next time there was a famine, you might survive and make your way through it. There's a mismatch, though. Most people in the world, and certainly people in the United States, don't live in that famine-laden environment anymore. And as

[15:19] a consequence, when food service corporations through clever engineering override our natural inclinations to eat and stop eating with specially engineered foods, they are exploiting this ancient circuit in our brains that says pack on the fat, pack on the sweet so that you can survive to live another day. Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
