TITLE: The strange science of placebos | David Linden
VIDEO ID: XJb6s2y6DBM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XJb6s2y6DBM
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-08
DURATION: 20:05
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] Like a lot of biologists, I've been resistant to the idea that our mental life affects our body profoundly. It seemed like something that was untestable and ethereal and operated in a different realm from biological science. In just the last 10 years, our understanding of that biology has gotten a whole lot better. So, it's not as if that all claims that have been made through history about mind-body medicine will turn out to be true and will turn out to be understandable, but a subset of them that seemed supernatural at one point will turn out ultimately to have real biological explanations. I'm David Linden. I'm a professor of neuroscience at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. For many years, my laboratory has studied neuroplasticity,

[01:01] that is how the brain and the nervous system are changed as the result of experience in the world. Voodoo death, broken heart syndrome, and placebos. Every scientist I know has their own favorite papers that they like to keep in a file folder and and look at because they're interesting or revolutionary or odd. And for me, one of these is the 1942 report by the eminent American physiologist Walter Cannon about the phenomenon he called voodoo death. Voodoo death, in his telling, means when people believe that they have been cursed and their belief system leads them to believe that they're going to die as a result of this curse or hex being placed upon them, and then they actually do. And you might think to yourself, well, does this really happen? I mean, aren't these just anecdotal reports? I'm skeptical. I don't really

[02:02] believe. But, Walter Cannon was not some flake. He was a very very eminent and careful physiologist, and he documented many cases around the world where people died as a result of being cursed. And he developed a physiological theory to underlie this. He said that the fighter flight part of the autonomic nervous system, the sympathetic nervous system, became hyperaroused during hex death. And this hyperarousal set in motion a series of physiological changes uh that ultimately killed people when they had this set of beliefs. Now, Cannon was acting before we knew a lot of physiology that we know in the modern era. He didn't know about the so-called hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis and the production of the stress

[03:02] hormone cortisol. That hadn't been invented or discovered yet. And he didn't know about the key role of the parasympathetic nervous system. So, Cannon's theory of voodoo death was half right. The sympathetic nervous system is involved, but it actually seems like what you need to get have voodoo death is a one-two punch. The first punch is the sympathetic nervous system goes into overdrive. The second punch is that the parasympathetic nervous system comes on and stays high in its activation, the rest and digest nervous system, for many many hours or days afterwards. And these two things together shut down the body and result in voodoo death ultimately. If you don't have the belief that you can be killed by a hex or curse, then it doesn't work. It doesn't work in the spirit world. It only works if you have that belief. And a corollary of that is if a witch doctor tells someone who believes in it that they have cursed

[04:03] them, but then before they die says, "No, I have a lifted the curse. It's not really happened. I've moved the bones. I've I've changed the feathers and this curse is no longer operated." Then they can recover. So, it entirely is in the mind and the body of the recipient of the curse where this is happening. It's not happening in the supernatural world. It's happening biologically in the mind and the body of the recipient. We might be tempted to think, "Oh, voodoo death, hex curses, this only happens in societies that have a certain set of supernatural beliefs that aren't the ones that dominate here in the USA or in Western Europe or in East Asia and in places that are more technologically advanced." But that's really not the case at all. So, there are papers in the medical literature about the effects of fatal misdiagnosis. So,

[05:03] for example, there is a a famous case of a man who was diagnosed with liver cancer. And this was a number of years ago in the 1970s when the kind of scans and diagnostics that were available weren't as sophisticated as they are now. And they said, "There's not that much we can do with you. We can keep you careful uh comfortable." He says, "I just want to live through Christmas with my family." And so, he got palliative care. He made it through Christmas. Right after New Year's, he dropped dead. So, we think, "Oh, well, the cancer got him. He was able to hang on. That's wonderful." They went in to do the autopsy. They were wrong. He didn't have liver cancer at all. As a matter of fact, he didn't have much wrong with him that was very serious at all. It was his belief that he had a fatal illness that killed him. And it probably killed him in exactly the same way that voodoo death kills people who believe in it.

[06:05] So, voodoo death is not just a phenomenon of a certain group of societies around the world. It is essentially also happens in modern medicine with people in white coats just in a slightly different setting. Everyone's family seems to have a story about a couple where one member died and then the other died of a broken heart soon thereafter. And you think, well, this is anecdotal. You know, people like to tell these stories. It seems romantic. It's something that that, you know, makes us feel warm and fuzzy about the power of love. But is this really true? If you do epidemiology, if you get a large population and you look at statistics, is it really true that people are more likely to die soon after their long-term partner dies? And the answer is yes. And what people die of are the whole range of things: cardiovascular incidents, cancer,

[07:07] autoimmune diseases. Uh all of the incident of these things can go up after the loss of a loved one. And it's not just a partner. It can be a close friend. It can be a uh sibling. Uh in some cases, it can even be a pet. But this kind of emotional state of grieving definitely leads to a worse prognosis for the person who is grieving. That is now well established. There is a fascinating phenomenon that was first discovered by doctors in Japan elderly grieving people. And it's called takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Taco is Japanese for octopus and tsubo means trap. And the reason it has this name is because the heart adopts a shape like a Japanese octopus trap. It produces an impairment in cardiac function. Most people recover from this

[08:09] cardiomyopathy, but some people die as a result. And we now believe that tako-takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a consequence of overactivation of the sympathetic nervous system. We have a biological explanation for it that allows us to bridge the behavioral experience of grief to this bodily experience of cardiac impairment. So, the belief that one has been hexed, cursed, and then dies, or from an inaccurate diagnosis leading to death, or mourning, its effects on on one's health, these are all negative things that can occur as a result of your mental state, but fortunately, it works the other way, too. Positive beliefs and positive mental states can work in the opposite direction and

[09:11] can do things like relieve pain or give you better health outcomes. When people think about mind-body medicine, there tends to be a focus on on behavioral things. Uh well, what can meditation do? What can regulated breathing do? What can What can prayer do? What can psychotherapy or psychosocial supports do? And that is an important part of of mind-body medicine. But mind-body medicine can also inform the development of drugs or devices. That is to say more conventional therapies that are based on this understanding. So GLP-1 based drugs come from understanding information that is flowing from the body to the mind. Now we have implanted devices to stimulate the vagus nerve and activate the parasympathetic nervous

[10:11] system that are useful in depression and epilepsy and possibly some other diseases. This is a device that is informed by our understanding of information flowing in the other direction from mind out to body. I think most people have heard of the placebo effect which is when someone is given a sugar pill or a or a sham treatment instead of the conventional medical treatment and they see benefits from it nonetheless. And it can happen in a lot of situations. There are placebo effects for pain, for clearing infections, for improvement in cardiovascular function. To me what's interesting about placebo effects is that we now have a very good understanding about how many of them work in biological terms. I think pain is probably the best example. When people

[11:15] are given sugar pills or sham treatments and are told this will relieve their pain and it really does, we now know that this effect can be blocked by the drug naloxone. And naloxone works by blocking receptors for opiates in the brain. And these are not just the receptors for drugs like heroin and fentanyl, they are the receptors for your brain's natural morphine-like molecules, the endorphins and the enkephalins. So, the fact that naloxone can block the placebo effect for pain tells us that the placebo effect for pain is being mediated in the body by endorphins and enkephalins, by the brain's natural morphine-like molecules. Placebo effects are best known in the case of pain relief, but they can actually occur for a whole bunch of beneficial medical situations. So, you

[12:17] can have a sugar pill or a sham treatment that improves your recovery from surgery and your healing rates. That can modify your immune system. Or, in some cases, if you are, say, receiving a graft, can help you suppress your immune system. We don't understand all the biology of all the cases where this works, but there are some really interesting experiments that illuminate it. So, for example, if I give you a drug that will reduce your blood pressure, and then I pair that drug with, say, lemon-lime flavoring that you drink in a in a little solution that you take in your mouth, and you pair that a number of times, and then just like Pavlov's dog, now if you drink the lemon-lime flavoring, it will be like you had the partial effect of your drug, and your blood pressure will go down, even though

[13:18] the blood pressure medicine isn't being given, only the lemon-lime drink is given. It seems as if a portion of the placebo effect is a kind of associative learning, although all the details of that are not yet understood. If you're a drug company and you have a drug that you think relieves pain well, the way that you are required to test it is by comparing it with a placebo. So, half the people in the study might get the drug and they have other half the people might get a sugar pill that they're being told is the drug. For the drug to be approved, it has to work significantly better than the effect that you would see just from the placebo. It's really fascinating to me that it seems like the placebo effect for pain over the last several decades has gotten stronger and stronger. As a result of this, it's hard to show a statistically significant difference for a real drug compared to the placebo because this placebo is is is relieving

[14:20] pain to a better and better degree and and and showing that something better than that then becomes much more of a challenge. And you might think, "Well, why is that happening? That's so weird. Why would the placebo effect be getting stronger?" It gets weirder. It's not getting stronger everywhere in the world. It's only getting stronger in the United States. Why is that the case? Well, we don't really know, but the best guess is that the United States is one of only two countries in the world, the other being in New Zealand, where direct-to-consumer advertising of drugs is allowed. And so, it may be that somehow this belief in the efficacy of drugs is stronger among people in the USA and maybe New Zealand, although we don't know it, than it is in other places and that this is the basis for the enhancement of the placebo effect for pain. So, the placebo effect is really counterintuitive. You

[15:21] might imagine that nowadays people know that placebos are used in clinical trials, and when someone is going into one of these trials, they could be thinking, "Am I getting the real drug? Am I getting a placebo?" And you might expect that that would make the placebo effect weaker. But, curiously, it doesn't. And it it even gets weirder than that. There's a phenomenon called open-label placebo. And an open-label placebo, it seems like it would never work. Open-label placebo is when you say, "I'm giving you a sugar pill, and it's just a sugar pill, and that's what we're doing here." And even with that knowledge, which you then think, "Well, there's going to be no effect whatsoever." You still get a placebo effect. To me, that's deeply counterintuitive, and yet it's been shown over and over again in the literature. And there are trials and whole branches of medicine using so-called open-label placebos. And to me, it's it's remarkable, and

[16:24] understanding of the biology of that is something that is is going to be really fascinating. When you look at the power of placebo effects, it certainly motivates you to try to understand mind-to-body signaling uh to a greater degree biologically. You think, "Well, where might this lead us to a future medicine?" Well, one way is if to say, "All right. Well, you know, maybe there are things we can do behaviorally to to to benefit in certain situations." If you're recovering uh uh from a heart attack, or you you know, you've just you've just had this or that therapy, or or or recovering from cancer treatment, you want to engage in these particular behavioral interventions. But, it's not just the behavioral interventions. In other words, understanding the signaling will also open us up for new drugs that manipulates

[17:25] those pathways or devices that manipulate those pathways. So, for example, we know that psychosocial support gives you benefit in terms of your recovery after a heart attack or after in in terms of your prognosis for for cancer. And so, one way is to say, "All right, well, what are the behaviors you can do?" But, another way might be to say, "Well, maybe we could stimulate your brain artificially with a device in a way that would help you heal. Right now, our ability to stimulate the nervous system non-invasively, that is to say, from outside the skull, is really, really crude. So, there are techniques. There's one called uh transcranial magnetic stimulation. There's another one called transcranial direct current stimulation. These stimulate large volumes of brain tissue,

[18:27] like the volume of a golf ball, and within they stimulate every kind of neuron in that volume. So, they're really crude ways to activate or inhibit very large parts of the brain. But, with time, we'll have much more subtle ways of activating small bits of the brain. And not just a small volume of the brain, but even there are parts of the brain where there are different flavors of neurons that that that do different tasks that are physically intermingled, and it's been impossible, either with an electrode or with with with one of these outside the skull methods, to activate them or inhibit them. But, there are going to be genetic optical tricks that we can now do in experimental animals to just activate one particular type of neuron in the brain that ultimately will able to be able to do as therapies for people. And this kind of manipulation that's coming down the pipe will eventually be used to

[19:32] exploit mind-to-body signaling in ways that are medically beneficial. And so, mind-body medicine just doesn't help us in the realm of behavioral interventions, it also helps us in the more conventional realm of drugs and devices. Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think Members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
