TITLE: Microbiome expert: Your diet is making you anxious and depressed | Tim Spector
VIDEO ID: YVwtt2MdfRg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YVwtt2MdfRg
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-06-23
DURATION: 29:05
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] People conceptually thought the brain, was separate to the body and this is the Cartesian view really that has penetrated and been very persistent in medicine for centuries and yet now the latest science is showing that the brain is just another organ and it relies on the gut for most of its information. We used to think the brain was telling the gut what to do, turns out most of the traffic is from the gut to the brain. My name's Tim Spector. I'm an MD. I'm a professor of epidemiology at King's College in London and I'm also co-founder of the nutrition and gut health company Zoe. >> An unhealthy gut leads to an unhealthy brain. >> The gut microbiome I like to think of as it's like a virtual organ in our bodies that we've only recently discovered. Something like discovering we had a liver. And essentially it's made up of

[01:02] trillions of little tiny microbes that you need a microscope to see, bacteria, fungi, parasites, viruses and other things we still don't exactly know about. This collection forms a community mainly inside the lower part of our colon, the large intestine. They convert the food that we eat into chemicals, into hundreds and thousands of different chemicals and those chemicals have this amazing impact on our body that we're only just beginning to realize. This collection of microbes has something like 200 times more genes than we have in our own human cells. That means they're much more versatile, they're more flexible in what they can produce in terms of chemicals and they're actually more numerous than our human cells. This is important because we evolved from these bacteria and the very first mammals and then humans were

[02:03] built because they contained these colonies of microbes that could interact with them. Without these microbes, we really wouldn't function and particularly our brains don't develop normally. So, one way to think about our gut microbiome is either as a the environment of a jungle or an amazing natural zoo where you've got these thousands of different species of microbes that have taken over little niche inside our gut that is very specialized to them. They're not all fighting for the same food. They've evolved, just like animals have, to get have very specific tastes. The example I like comes from our own research where we found there is one bug that only really eats or drinks coffee. It is so fussy, it hangs around maybe for years just waiting for that first cup of coffee before it will replicate

[03:04] and really start to be noticeable. If we start thinking of coffee as a great example, then you think about all the other bugs that we might have lying dormant in our guts that are waiting for us to eat something unusual, say a bit of baobab or some beetroot or um some particular type of of nut or herb or spice. And so, that's a really important concept because we now know that the more diverse your gut microbes are, the healthier you are. We need to be thinking, "How can I best feed these very different gut microbes, some of which might like coffee, others will only like uh the leaf of a bit of cabbage, others might like seeds or nuts, and others will like the leftovers from what the other microbes have eaten. And this is also really interesting concept because they they're working together. They make sure there's no waste. They are these perfect ecological

[04:06] beings so that the concept of waste doesn't really exist. And what they've shown in some mouse studies is that um if you uh have a really strong colony of gut microbes that are very diverse, then you eat your standard diet, you have no waste left over. But if you only have a few microbes, rather poor uh colony, they're not very well diversified, you get leftovers. And when you get the leftovers, then you get what we call the bad bugs will eat those uh because they've got something to eat. So, a really good healthy colony of microbes, like a zoo, is one where all the animals have a role, they've got something to eat. Uh there's no real waste, and everything is used up. It's really a marvelous model that we'd all love, a sustainable gut society. Although we all have thousands of species of these trillions of bugs inside our guts, we're actually

[05:06] really very different one to another. And this is because as as kids uh when we're born, we're born sterile. So, it's slightly random which microbes end up colonizing our own uh colons. And it turns out that the average person only shares about uh 20% of their gut microbes with another. And even in identical twins, they don't share many more than that. So, it's a process that's part random uh part uh designed that way, and not very genetic. This means that we all have a different set of microbes producing slightly different functions. Until recently, we didn't really know how good bugs and bad bugs were interacting, and it turns out they're fighting for resources. The good bugs, these are ones that eat your, for example, plants and

[06:06] change those plants into healthy chemicals that your body can then use. If they do well, they leave no food left over for the bad uh bugs, by which we mean bugs that increase when you have a bad diet with fast foods and burgers, etc., lots of fat. Those ones will increase and cause bad outcomes. So, it turns out that if you're only having a a good, diverse diet, there's very little waste to supply the bad bugs. This concept has changed quite recently, cuz we used to be thinking, "Okay, how do we get rid of the bad bugs that are causing inflammation, irritation in there?" But, now we know it's focusing on on the good, it's increasing uh those guys as much as possible, essentially giving them a greater diversity of food, so that everybody gets something to eat, and we can really use the full armory of all those good microbes to produce the

[07:08] biggest possible array of chemicals that the body can then use in the best way. When I started this research, we thought that the gut microbiome was really just involved in things like obesity and metabolism, and it's only recently we've realized that it does so much more. I like to think of it really interacting in sort of three key parts of the body. Yes, it does include metabolism, energy levels, it uh sends signals to the brain about appetite and body weight and distribution, etc. And is probably important in things like type 2 diabetes. But one of its key roles is acting on the immune system. Our immune system is pretty crucial for virtually every common disease that we're encountering at the moment. From autoimmune diseases, food allergies, to things like preventing cancer by these our immune cells killing off early cancers and the aging process itself. So, the

[08:10] immune system is a huge part of what the gut microbiome does and without a really good microbiome, you can't have a good immune system. The third key thing that the microbiome does is interact with our nervous system. And it does this through a huge network of nerves that are sometimes called our second brain. They're as big as a cat's brain. And they probably evolved around our intestine before even our brain was formed as when we were in the womb. And this network of of nerves connects to the brain primarily through the vagus nerve. This is like a fast internet cable that picks up what's going on in our gut microbes through the gut lining picking up signals in every single layer of the gut. So, right through to the the tiny connections right on the inside of the mucosa through every layer. So, they are actively sensing everything that's going on there. All

[09:12] these neurons interconnect. They're picking up signals from the gut microbes that are sending chemicals such as short-chain fatty acids that they make when they break down fiber. They might be getting it directly from the microbes or from the the cell wall of the microbes. They might be getting it from uh some hormones that the My are making these endocrine hormone sensing cells in the gut lining like GLP-1 that's people now know is how Ozempic works. They're picking up uh you know, hostile chemicals, good chemicals. Everything is is going through to these little little tiny neuron endings and they're being fed into this vagus nerve through this incredible cable to our brain where it tells the brain what's going on. This discovery has really changed our whole idea of the the gut-brain axis because

[10:12] we used to think the brain was telling the gut what to do. Turns out most of the traffic is from the gut to the brain. Many people have vaguely heard about inflammation. I was unusual because as a kid uh I heard about it a lot because my father was a professor who focused on inflammation. Before it was trendy and it went it was trendy briefly, then it went out of fashion. Now it's definitely back and everyone needs to know what it means. It's a normal response we all have to a threat in our in our bodies, whether it's stress or it's an infection or something alien to us. Our body responds. It sends all these white cells from our body to that site and triggers a whole careful reaction that gets rid of that threat as quickly as it can and goes back to normal. Now, we currently have uh problem with what's called chronic inflammation, which means it lasts too

[11:12] long. So, instead of getting a brief brief spike of uh inflammation in response to a threat, say some bad food uh that returns to normal our bodies have become in some way uh changed so that that threat level stays up. So we are suddenly going through life at a a threat level that isn't our baseline. That may be due to our environment of terrible food. It could be due to pollution, pesticides, all kinds of things, but or it could be due to our stressful lives and social media. Whatever the cause, it's true that in the West we have stress levels based on the levels of inflammation of our immune system that are higher than you would find in Africa or India or where our ancestors came from. I also learned a lot about because

[12:14] I was a rheumatologist originally in my one of my early careers before I changed several times and saw patients with rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune disease, who suffered a lot. And they were constantly tired because of the inflammation in their joints which spread to their bloods. I didn't think much about it because we thought they were tired and depressed because their joints hurt. And that's really what we were told, "Oh, it's normal. They are uh tired and depressed. They've got quite bad crippling arthritis." But it turns out it was just a reaction in the brain to what was going on in the rest of the body. We now know that many mental health problems, virtually all of them so means studied so far, have above average levels of inflammation. And they also have abnormal gut microbes.

[13:15] So there's a link between mental health disorders which nearly all of them have reduced energy and reduced mood to some extent, even in forms like psychosis and schizophrenia even in uh ones you don't regard as mental health, but brain problems in epilepsy or migraine, this is also true. So, there's a general increase in inflammation in the blood. There's also a general uh abnormality of the gut microbes compared to uh people who don't have any mental health problems. So, we're seeing this picture developing whereby we are getting uh much more common ground to explain this explosion in mental health problems that's that's based not on the old theory of uh a deficiency in certain brain chemicals or an excess of

[14:15] brain chemicals, but due to this underlying inflammation, which probably starts in the gut, and then sends those signals to the brain. So, an obvious question is, where does this inflammation come from? What's triggering the body to in a way overreact and keep overreacting to stimuli rather than dealing with the problem, getting rid of it, going back to the base state, which is what we know that our healthy ancestors had. Inflammation is both a cause and a consequence of many things we're talking about. The most obvious cause in the West of this uh pandemic of mental health problems is the fact that since the 1970s, we've been eating uh an increasingly bad diet. The standard American diet, the SAD diet, which is denuded of fiber, it's plenty of saturated fats, and it's

[15:16] full of ultra-processed food, all of which have been shown in uh particularly mouse models to cause inflammation in the gut of those mice leads to many more bad bugs compared to good bugs. There's not much for the good bugs to eat. The bad bugs take over. They like an inflammatory environment and they actually produce chemicals that will stir up uh the gut lining and uh that environment to in a way be more toxic and raise the levels of the immune cells in the body that think in a way they're infected or diseased in some way. So, I think that's the unifying idea of how uh bad food on a long-term basis causes this increase in the the immune cells which you've got to remember that the gut microbes probably by evolution are there to pick up signals from the environment, tell the brain who that can't really see

[16:17] outside the little skull what's going on. Gives it an idea of what's going on. It's this consciousness and it's picking up these signals and if those signals are bad food, inflammation, heightened fear, it's like, "Gosh, there's something bad going on here. Let's signal that back to the brain." What does the brain do? It goes into some sort of lockdown mode. A sickness behavior, some people call it, which is quite natural. It it's getting a signal from its main communicator, the gut, along the vagus nerve, it tells it, "All kinds of is happening down here. This is not good. We're getting really bad signals. How do we react in evolution? We'd say it's like an infection. We lower our mood, we lower our sociability, we lower our activity, we tell the body we're tired, so we rest. And that's where you get fatigue, mood change, and all the other associated factors, and you end up with

[17:18] what we're calling depression. That's my way of thinking about this problem for perhaps the commonest factor that's changed in our lives in the last 50 years and particularly why in kids we're seeing this this pandemic at the moment. Kids that have had mothers that were had terrible diets that passed that on to the kids and then basically they've had ultra-processed foods for the the whole of their lives without ever having any real food to nourish any the few good microbes there are. Only the bad ones have been surviving in that jungle just on the fats and the scraps and the artificial sweeteners and the chemicals etc. So, I think that for me is the the key model. You can also think of other ways that you might get inflammation and my research in this area is not that I've done it myself, but

[18:19] looking at the the literature is that many of the risk factors for mental health disorders are all the same. So, it doesn't matter which of these so-called 300 different disorders you have, the risk factors are the same. Childhood stress, trauma, poor diets and living in urban environments. All of these things increase stress and they now know that that stress you can see as an increase in inflammation in the in the immune system. So, just psychological stress can also cause this as well as in a way dietary or gut stress end up with the same common pathway. After a bad night's sleep or some stress your body seems to crave fatty and sugary things that are unhealthy and we've all experienced that after a a poor night's sleep or a hangover or whatever it is, you reach for the the one thing that you think you you need, but it turns out you're wrong. Your

[19:20] brain's giving you the wrong directions, and this is going to make you probably feel worse. So, this sort of explains this loop people get in, particularly with depression or anxiety, the brain is telling them to do one thing that actually is making it worse. And so, it really explains why people with low mood and depression end up eating badly and can't get out of it, and it's making them worse. I hadn't really thought about the gut-brain connection quite as much, but about 9 years ago my mother uh suffered a stroke. She ended up uh in a care home with uh dementia. Each time I visit her, you know, I am reminded of the fact that so many of us now are potentially facing this fate in old age. And it's not something that anyone really wants. Dementia is probably the the worst way to go. So, it's made me think about this more

[20:22] and start to look how my own research could potentially have an impact or help not only myself, but other people prevent uh dementia or at least delay it uh considerably. It turned out my mother with her stroke and subsequent acceleration of dementia probably had what's called vascular dementia, which is a fairly general term that affects about one in three people who get dementia. It's the second commonest form, and it tends to occur in phases, so that the blood supply to the brain is getting progressively diminished and knocked off probably by atherosclerosis in the arteries supplying the brain. The other type of dementia that many people hear about is Alzheimer's, which is probably the commonest form of dementia,

[21:22] perhaps affecting 60% of all cases, and it can start in a similar way with loss of memory or cognitive function and then progresses at a a more sustained pace that doesn't have these separate phases. And that's caused slightly differently, it being distinguished by having these protein folds in the brain, these amyloid and these tau proteins that have led to some of the damage in the brain as the brain has been shrinking. Now, we don't know they are causal. It could be that these proteins just are part of the damage after it's occurred, but we believe that there are some common causes of both these types of dementia, that the risk factors seem to be quite similar. In both cases, we can link this back to gut poor gut health. The picture of gut health that

[22:23] uh where you have a low ratio of good to bad bugs, you've got poor diversity of species, and you've got an inflammatory component going on there, is a major risk for both types of dementia, as is things like type 2 diabetes, which probably is involves the energy supply to the brain, which affects both. So, for practical purposes, you should be trying to prevent both kinds of dementia cuz they have a big overlap in the causes, although they can look very different at the end. So, we have got microbes all through our intestinal tract and that really means from mouth to our anus. And some bits are harder to access than others. It's very hard to know what's going on in the middle bit, the small intestine, because it's very hard to reach. And so we rely generally on what's happening in stool samples, but we also can look at what's happening in our

[23:24] mouths, in our saliva, where which is teeming with microbes that are there basically to protect us, but also start the first bit of digestion of food. And just like in our colon, there's a little colony of microbes there that uh interact with each other and you have good ones and you have bad ones. And if you provide an environment uh that uh doesn't clear away your food, leaves food waste, the bad bugs will accumulate and they can lead to inflammation. And this tends to happen um at the interface between your teeth and your gums. And we know the gum disease is very prevalent in in the West, periodontitis. And specific bugs absolutely love the environment there. You get slight redness and swelling, which is a sign of inflammation. And you can generally see it there. Your gums might be slightly tender, might be

[24:24] swollen, might be red. And in certain cases, they will bleed if you uh floss them or brush them hard. That's a sign that you've got inflammation there, that there are bad bugs living there, eating the bits of food. They form plaques. And a plaque is a uh a complicated structure that's made by these microbes that builds up like a a protective shield so that in a way they can keep uh digging away, eating things, uh and they're protected from you uh brushing them away. So, our teeth, it turns out, are really good place to look for inflammation, and remarkably, we we we learned about 10 or even 15 years ago that dental decay was related to heart disease. And there were certain microbes they found very early on. I think it was strep mutans is associated with uh increased risk of heart attacks. This

[25:25] was very strange when that first came out, I remember. Now we're able to look much more broadly at all the microbes. We know that poor uh mouth hygiene means high rates of bad microbes compared to good ones. These are pro-inflammatory. And if you're not brushing and flossing your teeth, you have roughly a 25% increase in heart disease, and some studies are showing anything between 20 and 50% uh increase in uh dementia and cognitive decline. So, suddenly we've got a really good example of how um uncontrolled inflammation in our bodies can have a direct effect on areas we hadn't really thought linked at all like our brain. I think this gives people the idea uh of how important it is and how preventive action can work because if you then brush your teeth regularly,

[26:26] you'll reduce that risk perhaps by half. So, rather than 50%, you're down to 25%, but if you then floss, um which is gives you an extra say 30 or 40% of cleaning, you do that really well, and you can get rid of the plaque, and get rid of the bleeding, and the the inflammation, you can get right back to zero. So, I think this is a marvelous example of how we need to battle inflammation in our bodies really to save our brain health. Well, it's hard for the average person to know what their gut health is like. Basically, it means that your your trips to the toilet are regular. Look at your stool and you see is it fairly soft? You don't want to be a cow pat. You don't want to be a a sheep dropping. You want something in between and you are going once or twice a day. If that's the case and you're not getting any bloating and you're not having constipation or diarrhea or

[27:27] you know, a lack of regularity, then you're probably pretty healthy. If the opposite is true and you're having any of these problems, your stools look rather strange, they're, you know, varying, you're only going once or twice a week, then it's highly likely you have gut problems and you need some dietary help. We talked earlier about thinking about your mood and energy. Are you fatigued? Is your mood lower than it should be? Are you getting some bloating? These are signs you do have gut health issues and you should address them. Improving your plant intake will improve your fiber. You know, do a bit of exercise, have some more water, etc. Having done that, if you want to test your gut microbiome, which I think will be standard of care in 5 years time, it's very difficult now to know who to go to. Your general family physician may or may not be able to help. A functional medicine doctor probably will and we're seeing more of those. More holistic type

[28:29] doctors appearing, but it's not something that's very easy to do, but I think a good gut microbiome test is much more useful to you than getting your your genes tested or your DNA. It's really your metabolic blood pressure. If your gut health is good, most of the rest of you is going to be pretty good and if it's bad, you're going to have problems. >> Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
