TITLE: What does it mean to truly move like a human? 🤔
VIDEO ID: 8dF9WQwEK0E
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8dF9WQwEK0E
UPLOAD DATE: 2025-09-02
DURATION: 70:53
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] All right. So, with that, I I know people know you, but I want to make an introduction of you, how how I met you, how I encountered you, and you know, how cool it's been to interact with you as a whole. So, Lauren, I I don't even know if you remember, our first interaction was like probably back in like 2022, maybe 2023. I had just gotten Instagram. I wasn't in the role I'm in now. And I think the first video I ever saw of you was you pinch gripping something that was I don't know 180 or 200 pounds or something like that and you just pinch scripted and picked it up and I think immediately I sent you a message on the story. I was like oh man I said something and then you said something positive back and that was about the length of our the extent of our conversation. Then I remember seeing you on Shel's channel because you were helping her with her handstand and then I saw you on somebody else's channel. Somebody in the Moen community again prior to me being in the role. Then I did my L3 and NA model was one of the during my L3 and he was mentioning some

[01:00] of the people who ever passed on their first try and he talked about you being one of those people like, "Oh Lord, yeah, that guy's an animal. He's he literally passed everything pretty easily." and then I got into the role and then earlier this year me and you had a coaching conversation and you're probably one of the first professionals outside of the move community that I that and and what I mean by outside the move community mean you're not an employee of movement was an interaction of a conversation that you really have a deep understanding of of movement at all of its levels. A lot of people who are into the fitness realm or genre or industry or whatever it is, they look at fitness like numbers. They look at fitness like it's trying to get a performance variable that's improved. But you understand movement as a behavior. And and that was something that the moment I saw that I was like, "Oh, this guy knows exactly what's up." And you're this guy in the community that helps prepare people for their movement certifications. And one thing that I wanted to so that's my background

[02:01] about how we've met and we've interacted and the one thing I wanted when I reached out to you the second time and I'm so grateful that you agreed to it was to have a conversation with somebody who is knows what they're doing in this industry in this field lives and breathes what they practice and we can open up the door to allow members of the natural movement community not just moved out as a whole I want to use that as a hub for to open dialogue because I feel like there's not enough opportunity for people to communicate without ego and without because a lot of people I was mentioning this on a couple of calls ago people have imposter syndrome right they're scared to ask for help because of whatever position they may hold in life or or they're scared to ask for help because they're scared to look a certain way and a lot of people fake it without making it and then they we have a whole other subsection of people that are professionals in their own right but they don't lean on people to gain insight or learn some mentoring or gain this one thing that truly appreciate you for taking the call. And that's my long- winded inter introduction to anybody who

[03:02] doesn't know who you are, but you understand movement as a behavior >> and and that was something that the moment I saw that I was like, "Oh, this guy knows exactly what's up." And you're this guy in the community that helps prepare people for their movement certifications. One thing that I wanted to So, that's my background about how we've met and we've interacted. And the one thing I wanted when I reached out to you the second time and I'm so grateful that you agreed to it was to have a conversation with somebody who is knows what they're doing in this industry in this field lives and breathes what they practice and we can open up the door to allow members of the natural movement community not just moved out as a whole I want to move that as a hub for just open dialogue because I feel there's not enough opportunity for people to just communicate without ego and without because a lot of people I was mentioning this on a couple of calls ago go. People have imposter syndrome, right? They're scared to ask for help because of whatever position they may hold in life or or they're scared to ask for help because they're scared to look a certain way. And a lot of people fake it without

[04:02] making it. And then they we have a whole other subsection of people that are professionals in their own right, but they don't lean on people to gain insight or learn some mentoring or gain this one thing that truly appreciate you for taking the call. And that's my long-winded inter introduction to anybody who doesn't know who you are. >> Well, thank you. I appreciate the community aspect of all this stuff and totally understand. Sometimes people just see vanity metrics and think that people are making money and they might not be making any money or somebody has a small following. They might be really talented and know what they're talking about and be making a lot more money than somebody and and when I say making money, I mean providing value for people in exchange obviously for making a living. But thanks for the introduction. It was probably a lot less than that what I was pitching. But >> the first thing I want to talk and ask you just to give a little bit more background of you is how did this all start? How did you turn into the animal you are? Because if you see you on the internet, you're breaking like an orangutang. You can pinch grip 200 pounds. You're obviously a very skilled mover, high level. Have you always been that way or is it something that was new

[05:04] to you? Something you discovered late in life or were you always active? >> Yeah, I would say I was always active but I was never never an athlete. came to being more of an athlete much later in life. I didn't grow up playing sports. And while I say I was active, I really enjoyed watching action movies and trying to go jump off hop fences, jump off roofs, and do all that kind of stuff. I was always I really struggled because I had a really poor standard American diet. I didn't have a whole lot of role models. I didn't play sports. Wasn't very healthy when I was a lot younger. And so, it wasn't until my sophomore year in high school that I actually found parkour. And then that really just sent me down the path that I'm on today. I suppose >> that was the thing that that changed it for you was parkour. From what I'm hearing, when you were young, you were so into action, like action movies that you just wanted to do all the cool stuff. >> Yeah. I think it was I've talked about since the podcast, too. I have this idea that entertainment was not purely consumptive pre-ocial media where we we would see something and then want to actually try and emulate it, try and be it. And that was definitely the case for

[06:05] me. And I think what really separated it though is when I found parkour, it something switched in my brain where it gave me permission as an adult to try and pursue this as a young adult still in high school to try and take it more seriously and try and figure out why I struggled to be an athlete, struggled to be fast, struggled to do all the things I wanted when I was younger. And so that led me to diet, nutrition, and more like more of a holistic approach. And I guess one interesting segue here is for me it was parkour and seeing other adults doing it that gave me that permission. And I see what I see move doing in the community a lot for people as well is people seeing it. It's out of the ordinary for them and then it somehow gives them permission or gives them insight into moving in a way that isn't just like clinical gym work that isn't something that they may have tried before. So for me it was definitely that was the foot in the door to really believe that it was something I could pursue long term as an adult. And then I guess to answer kind of your question of how I got to where I am now is just 20 years. It'll be 20 years next year since I found parkour. And from there it

[07:08] wasn't just parkour. It was studying a lot of different modalities, working with a lot of mentors, a lot of coaches, cross-disciplinary. Well, thank you. Yeah, I appreciate the community aspect of all this stuff and and yeah, totally understand. Sometimes people just see vanity metrics and think that people are making money and they might not be making any money or somebody has a small following. they might be really talented and know what they're talking about and be making a lot more money than somebody and and when I say making money I mean providing value for people in exchange obviously for making a living but but yeah thanks for the introduction. It was probably a lot less than that what I was pitching but >> yeah so the the the first thing I want to talk and ask you to give a little bit more background of you was how did this all start? How did you turn into the animal you are? Because if you see you on the internet you're breakating like an orangutang. You can pinch grip 200 pounds. drive a very skilled mover high level. Have you always been that way or is it something that was new to you? Something you discovered late in life or were you always active? >> Yeah, I would say I was always active,

[08:09] but I was never never an athlete and came to being more of an athlete much later in life. I didn't grow up playing sports and while I say I was active, I really enjoyed watching action movies and trying to go jump off hop fences, jump off roofs, and do all that kind of stuff. I was always I really struggled because I had a really poor standard American diet. I didn't have a whole lot of role models. I didn't play sports. Wasn't very healthy when I was a lot younger. And so it wasn't until my sophomore year in high school that I actually found parkour. And then that really just sent me down the path that I'm on today, I suppose. >> So that was the thing that that changed it for you was parkour. And you so so from what I'm hearing when you were young you were so into action action movies that you just wanted to do all cool stuff. >> Yeah. Yeah. I think it was I've talked about since the podcast too. I have this idea that entertainment was not purely consumptive preocial media where we we would see something and then want to actually try and emulate it, try and be it. And that was definitely the case for me. And I think what really separated it

[09:09] though is when I found parkour, it something switched in my brain where it gave me permission as an adult to try and pursue this as a young adult still in high school to try and take it more seriously and try and figure out why I struggled to be an athlete, struggled to be fast, struggled to do all the things I wanted when I was younger. And so that led me to diet, nutrition, and more more of a holistic approach. And I guess one interesting segue here is for me it was parkour and seeing other adults doing it that gave me that permission. And I see what I see move doing in the community a lot for people as well is people seeing it. It's out of the ordinary for them and then it somehow gives them permission or gives them insight into moving in a way that isn't just like clinical gym work that isn't something that they might may have tried before. So for me it was definitely that was the foot in the door to really believe that it was something I could pursue long term as an adult. And then I guess to answer your question of how I got to where I am now is just you know 20 years it'll be 20 years next year since I found parkour and from there it wasn't

[10:10] just parkour it was studying a lot of different modalities working with a lot of mentors a lot of coaches cross-disciplinary and that's also what I like you mentioning too is in the fitness industry you see a lot of egos you see a lot of posturing you see a lot of people that don't want to collaborate and work together that's not what we're doing is we're taking things that we learned things that have been done and you like we might repackage it a little bit differently, bring our own lens to it, but ultimately we're just trying to elevate everybody. And I guess one fitness tie in here is for anybody listening to this that knows David Wet, I feel like he's one of the loudest voices in the fitness community right now, really trying to unify people across disciplines to try and find the best methods, find the best practices, and his slogans, you know, like every step stronger for everyone and make mankind again, those sorts of things really resonate with me. And that's also what I like you mentioning too is in the fitness industry you see a lot of egos. You see a lot of posturing. You see a lot of people that don't want to collaborate and work together. And I'm not inventing anything per se. You're not move. What we're doing is we're

[11:11] taking things that we learned things that have been done and you know like we might repackage it a little bit differently, bring our own lens to it, but ultimately we're just trying to elevate everybody. And I guess one fitness tie in here is it for anybody listening to this that knows David Wet. I feel he's one of the loudest voices in the fitness community right now. Really trying to unify people across disciplines to try and find the best methods, find the best practices. And his slogans, you know, every step stronger for everyone and make mankind again, those sorts of things really resonate with me. And I think what connects us and what connects move to everyone that looks beyond fitness as simply punishment or a means to lose weight or something like that is that it's like natural movement really should be or for at least for me is the underpinning of of kind of all of these things. And so yeah, as as adults in the modern world, it's not always going to be purely natural movement running barefoot, you know, and like really glorified. There's going to be different therapeutic doses of things that are going to speed up our processes to

[12:14] ultimately re like get back to that robust common ancestor that we all had. And that's kind of where I thought of the idea for my own branding, human wild, is that I believe that we all stem from a common ancestor more or less that was wildly robust, physically capable, and could thermmorreulate on levels that we can't even imagine today. And you know, so many things like that. And so that's that's what I'm trying to get a glimpse of in my own life and help other people see that like our natural state is healthy. Our natural state is robust if we don't get in our own way. And that goes for movement in our environment, diet, lifestyle, toxin, relationships, all that stuff. >> Yeah, we're we're inherently designed to be human and that's what everybody forgets. We're not inherently designed to be in the environment we are now. That's a whole different conversation. So parkour parkour was the thing that that took you and opened the door and gave you permission to explore and become who you are today essentially. The next thing I wanted to talk about, you did go through the move curriculum,

[13:15] but you didn't have to go through it because you didn't need to learn the stuff that was teaching, right? You already know, which is pretty crazy, right? So, you came through a prepundonderance of evidence and through your life skills and through your own research and your own trial and tribulation and all that stuff and you actually went through Moonnet just to get exposed to the community. And I imagine that at some point it probably provided you just a a reaffirmation of your philosophy of movement and training and education and things like that because you're already in that direction. You were doing all of that stuff. >> Yeah. I mean, it's it's it's always very powerful with any concepts and things that we're teasing out in life. If you're reading a book and there are some common threads or truths or things that are resonating with things you already believe, not necessarily things you're learning for the first time, it always can give you the opportunity to see things a little bit more fresh. Even having a conversation with a good friend that agrees with you on 80% of what you're saying, even just hearing you talk about those things can often

[14:15] reorient things. Yep. Yeah. Totally. And so for me, like you said, getting connected with MoveNet was twofold. one at the time in my life after just having our first kid and a lot of life shifts, I just wanted to try and jump into it and flash it as a personal challenge. So, go through level one, two, and then three was kind of the big fun one. Um, and we did it there in Colorado at 9,000 ft. And for me, it was like I know that I can easily do the individual things. And then where the more of the challenge came in was over the course of four days, every single challenge, can I do it perfectly first try? And so it's the the accumulation of the things that was I trained for it and there was a couple elements that I trained for that were a little bit more out of my wheelhouse and we can go into those a little bit too but that was the first one. I was a personal challenge and the second one like you said is the nature and the ethos of the move community was something I just wanted to be connected with. It echoes a lot of my my philosophies and my values and I I saw

[15:16] from afar that a lot of the people seem amazing people and I wanted to connect with them and in the fitness community I feel like it is a bit of a rarity where we have that scarcity mentality and people which which is insane when you look at the population versus coaches and even coaches need coaches and I have coaches for me and I coach coaches >> so it's just kind of ridiculous but yeah it was just something that I definitely wanted to connect with and I knew that I wanted to for a few years. And I think what connects us and what connects move to everyone that looks beyond fitness as simply punishment or a means to lose weight or something like that is that it's like natural movement really should be or for at least for me is the underpinning of all of these things. And so yeah, as as adults in the modern world, it's not always going to be purely natural movement running barefoot, you know, and like really glorified. There's going to be different therapeutic doses of things that are going to speed up our processes to ultimately re like get back to that robust common ancestor that we all had.

[16:16] And that's where I thought of the idea for my own branding human wild is that I believe that we all stem from a common ancestor more or less that was wildly robust, physically capable and could thermorreulate on levels that we can't even imagine today and so many things like that. And so that's that's what I'm trying to get a glimpse of in my own life and help other people see that our natural state is healthy. Our natural state is robust if we don't get in our own way. And that goes for movement in our environment, diet, lifestyle, toxin, relationships, all that stuff. >> Yeah. We're we're inherently designed to be human. And that's what everybody kind of forgets. We're not inherently designed to be in the environment we are now. That's a whole different conversation. So parkour parkour was the thing that that took you and opened the door and gave you permission to explore and become who you are today essentially. The next thing I wanted to talk about, you did go through the move curriculum, but you didn't have to go through it because you didn't need to learn the stuff that was teaching, right? You already know, which is pretty

[17:18] crazy, right? So, you came through a prepoundonderance of evidence and through your life skills and through your own research and your own trial and tribulation and all that stuff. And you actually went through Moonnet just to get exposed to the community. And I imagine that at some point it probably provided you just a reaffirmation of your philosophy of movement and training and education and things like that because you're already in that direction. You were doing all of that stuff. >> Yeah. I mean it's it's it's always very powerful like with any concepts and things that we're teasing out in life. If you're reading a book and there are some common threads or truths or things that are resonating with things you already believe, not necessarily things you're learning for the first time, it always can give you the opportunity to see things a little bit more fresh. Even having a conversation with a good friend that agrees with you on 80% of what you're saying, even just hearing you talk about those things can often like reorient things. Yep. Yeah. Totally. And so for me, like you said, kind of

[18:19] getting connected with MoNet was twofold. one at the time in my life after just having our first kid and a lot of life shifts, I just wanted to try and jump into it and flash it, you know, as a personal challenge. So, like go through level one, two, and then three was kind of the big fun one. Um, and we did it there in Colorado at 9,000 ft. And for me, it was like I know that I can easily do the individual things. And then where the more of the challenge came in was over the course of four days, every single challenge, can I do it perfectly first try? And so it's the the accumulation of the things that was, you know, I trained for it. And there was a couple elements that I trained for that were a little bit more out of my wheelhouse. And we can go into those a little bit too, but that was the first one. I was like a personal challenge. And the second one, like you said, is the nature and the ethos of the Moenat community was something I just wanted to be connected with. It it echoes a lot of my my philosophies and my values and I saw from afar that a lot of the people seemed like amazing people and I wanted

[19:20] to connect with them and in the fitness community I feel like it is a bit of a rarity where we have that scarcity mentality and people which which is insane when you look at the population versus coaches and even coaches need coaches and I have coaches for me and I coach coaches >> so it's just kind of ridiculous but yeah it was just something that I definitely wanted to connect with and I knew that I wanted to for a few years. It just I didn't have the right timing and then I think it was 2022 it just worked out and made it happen and got to do that there in Colorado with the Nate's Native Amato and Nate Nate Smith. It just I didn't have the right timing and then I think it was 2022 it just worked out and made it happen and got to do that there in Colorado with the Nate's Native Amato and Nate Nate Smith. I had the those two were my my instructors when I did my LT. So, one thing that I have to note to just say it out loud is what you just mentioned reminds me of something. So I I was a an exercise physiologist in a in clinical setting in a hospital setting

[20:22] >> and one of the who's now this person is now CEO of three or two hospital systems in B to South for those of you who don't know B to South Florida is like the large the second largest employer in Miami date county they have hospitals spanning from the keys all the way to West Palm Beach it's like a monster of an entity >> and this person hit me with something that was so prolific in my mind at the time I was in my 20s And she told me perfection is the enemy of progress. >> And what you just said now, right, ego and people who like the scarcity mentality, oh I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, is really just the bane of anybody's ability to become progressive and to learn, continue to improve. And you have never struck me as anybody who's anything like that. In fact, you're the opposite. And you just mentioned it now. I have a coach. My coach has a coach. you you recognize that there's still always an opportunity to learn regardless of what it is. When I get into an opportunity to do education, I sometimes take a certification on something that I already know and I go there just in case

[21:23] I could learn still one more thing. Even if I paid $200 or if I paid $1,000 or if I paid $1,500 bucks and I learn one thing, it's worth it to especially if it's one thing that I can apply. Now, if I learned five things, I think the thing that reaffirmed my desire to continue in the path of natural movement was I did a principles of loaded strength training and this was actually a kabuki strength certification. >> I went to go do it and it was in their facility in in Oregon, Oregon. One of the exercises they did was the getup. >> And they were using it as a shoulder stability, mobility warm-up for bench pressing or something like that. >> And the the guy who went to do it, you know, he back squats 600 lb. He looks like a ninja turtle. And he was struggling to do the elbow roll up to the hand post. >> Mhm. >> And when I saw that, I'm like, wait a minute. Like, you know, back squat 600 lb. And you know, this this whole idea of getting here was like it was like

[22:23] this. And they broke us up into small groups and I had to do that same thing. And when I did it, he stopped the entire room and had them all look at me and he was like, "Oh man, this is how it's supposed to be done. Look how smooth, look how fluid it is." Now I can't. But that moment was a moment of I'm moving in the right direction. Not to say that there's anything wrong with floor lifting or weightlifting, anything like that. You want >> totally you have you have basic basic human function. And so kind of how I approach my training too is it's like you have what the you know if you improve the human generally with natural movement with capacity to get up off the floor grip strength just general human capacity then you tend to alleviate peripheral symptoms and issues but then once you start to get into specializing you're going to inevitably start to sacrifice general capacities but I feel like there that threshold is something to be debated. I think that I think that people specialize at the detriment of generality when general skills and capacities can actually push

[23:24] specialization higher than they believe. At a certain point, it's self-destructive. Life itself is self-destructive. We're all dying. Eating food kills you. Not eating food kills you. It's just metabolism. We have to decide and pick our battles. But I think that there's a bit of a a misconception of where the generalist is still aiding the specialist where that transition actually happens. And kind of to your point, when I work with folks and go through general human standards and start working on just moving better, feeling better in your joints, almost all of them report stronger lifts, better performance metrics initially because these most people aren't at that benching or back squatting 600, whatever at the elite level. Most people are just kind of in the middle of the pack. And so some of the basic moveven net stuff, some of the basic function like that actually amplifies range of motion strength and and I think that's what really floores people is when they see those tiny little things move the needle so much. >> Yeah. Because it's it's it's increasing what's called degeneracy, right? I had the those two were my my instructors

[24:26] when I did my LT. One thing that I have to note to just say it out loud is what you just mentioned reminds me of something. I I was an exercise physiologist in a in clinical setting in a hospital setting >> and this person is now CEO of three or two hospital systems in B to South for those of you who don't know back to South Florida is second largest employer in Miami date county they have hospitals spanning from the keys all the way to West Palm Beach it's a monster of an entity this person hit me with something that was so prolific in my mind at the time I was in my 20s and she told me perfection is the enemy of progress would you just said now when people the scarcity mentality oh I know I know I know I know I know I know I know is really the bane of anybody's ability to become progressive and to learn continue to improve you have never struck me as anybody who's anything like that in fact you're the opposite you just mentioned it now I have a coach my coach has a coach you recognize that there's still always an opportunity to learn regardless of what it is when I get into an opportunity to do education I sometimes take a certification on

[25:27] something that I already know and I go there in case I could learn still one more Even if I paid $200 or if I paid $1,000 or if I paid 1,500 bucks and I learn one thing, it's worth it to especially if it's one thing that I can apply. Now, if I learn five things, the thing that reaffirmed my desire to continue in the path of natural movement was I did a principles of loaded strength training at this was actually a kabuki strength certification. >> I went to go do it and it was in their facility in in Oregon in Clinus, Oregon. One of the exercises they did was the getup. >> And they were using it as a shoulder stability, mobility warm-up for bench pressing, something like that. And the the guy who went to do it, you know, he back squats 600 lb. He looks like a ninja turtle. And he was struggling to do the elbow roll up to the hand post. >> And when I saw that, I'm like, wait a minute. Like, you know, back squat 600 lb. And you know, this this whole idea of getting here was it was this. And uh

[26:29] they broke us up into small groups and I had to do that same thing. And when I did it, he stopped the entire room and had them all look at me and he was like, "Oh man, this is how it's supposed to be done. Look how smooth, look how fluid it is." Now I can't. But that moment was a moment of ah I'm moving in the right direction. Not to say that there's anything wrong with floor lifting or weightlifting, anything like that. You want to go >> totally you have you have basic basic human function. And so how I approach my training too is it's you have what if you improve the human generally with natural movement with capacity to get up off the floor grip strength general human capacity then you tend to alleviate peripheral symptoms and issues but then once you start to get into specializing you're going to inevitably start to sacrifice general capacities but I feel there that threshold is something to be debated. I think that I think that people specialize at the detriment of generality when general skills and capacities can push specialization

[27:29] higher than they believe. At a certain point, it's self-destructive. Life itself is self-destructive. We're all dying. Eating food kills you. Not eating food kills you. It's metabolism. We have to decide and pick our battles. But I think that that there's a bit of a a misconception of where the generalist is still aiding the specialist where that transition actually happens. And to your point, when I work with folks and go through general human standards and start working on moving better, feeling better in your joints, almost all of them report stronger lifts, better performance metrics initially because these most people aren't at that benching or back squatting 600, whatever at the elite level. Most people are in the middle of the pack and some of the basic move net stuff, some of the basic function like that amplifies range of motion, strength, and and I think that's what really floores people is when they see those tiny little things move the needle so much. >> Yeah. Because it's it's it's increasing what's called degeneracy, right? Your ability to perform a task multiple ways because now you have acquired,

[28:31] right? your ability to perform a task multiple ways because now you have access to different things. So going into your L3, right? You did your L3, you mentioned something earlier that your challenge was to complete everything on the first try and do it as best as possible. You mentioned that you trained for it because there were certain things that were outside of your wheelhouse. What were those things that were outside? >> It was only one thing and is it was the run at elevation. So I'm not much of a runner. I'm not going to pretend like I am. I sprint. I jump. I love that stuff, but I don't run really. It's just not something I do. So, for that, the standard was it's a three mile run. And I think it was the goal was a 8 minute lap, I want to say or 8 minute miles. For the three miles at elevation, 9,000 foot elevation. There was about maybe 1,000 foot elevation change. It was two laps barefoot on granite, pine needles, crossing some. there was a barbwire fence crossing that he had to cross twice because it was two laps. And so

[29:31] that was the thing that I was unsure of because one, I've never ran a race at that elevation and two 200 lb 6'3 not a crosscountry runner by any means, but I have really good barefoot conditioning and I can do pretty much anything I can do in shoes I can do barefoot for the most part. So that was just easy for me. But so I I was actually sleeping in a hyperbaric like a oxygen deprivation tent that I borrowed from one of my clients in Bend and I was doing some track work specifically for that cuz that was the one I was like I don't know. And so so I trained for it pretty thoroughly. And then the coach I won't throw anyone under the bus here. The coach that was pacing the first lap they said don't pass the pacer on the first lap. and they paced us like a minute and a half or two minutes slow for the split that we needed to actually finish it within time. And so I had to drop that time on the second lap. So I had to go a minute and a half faster than I would have paced my miles. Um and I finished it right at the right time. So I was the only one that passed it at the time. >> Yeah. There was only I think when I did that it was a three-mile run. It wasn't

[30:33] 8 minute mile pace. It was 9 minutee mile pace and it wasn't in where you described. It was like on an actual trail hit. >> Yeah. And I was not physically prepared for I'm from Miami so below sea level >> and I didn't have access to a hyperaric chamber or anything like that down here to prep. So I decided to try and go up but I didn't have enough leeway. You should be up there 10 to 14 days before to kind of activate. I managed to get about seven days up front. But even the 5,000 ft of elevation hit because I got into Denver first and then we ended up going to Conifer and we were in Smith's property which is I think 8,000 elevation and then it was another grand and that kind of rush I remember having a bunch scoop my way out of there. My feet were destroyed because it was like not pine needles, not grass, it was great rocks and granite and stone and I was like man this is crazy. But yeah, and I'm glad that you prepared so thoroughly for >> so I still I still had to push it with that with that drop set on that last one. I was giving it everything I had

[31:33] and I finished it right on time and then people slowly trickled in after that. But yeah, real fast before we go farther, just for people that make it to this far in the video, I did want to put in a big plug just for the benefit of people watching. One of the big things that I found in my 20 plus years of coaching and training is the chin-up is such a goal for people and often people put it off and don't achieve it or coaches don't really have a very succinct way to teach it to scale it. And so I just think that's knowledge people should have for free. Everyone should have it. And I want to dump my best method. So I have a live call at the end of the month. I'm sure you're going to stick it in the newsletter or something. Okay, if anybody drops live call, just a comment on any of my posts, there's an automatic link that'll get sent to you with the Zoom and the date for that call. So, yeah, I want as many people as possible to know my thoughts and methods on getting a chin up so we can just get that out of the way and start doing fun stuff. >> You did your own three. You mentioned something earlier that your challenge was to complete everything on the first try and do it as best as possible. You mentioned that you trained for it

[32:33] because there were certain things that were outside of your real house. What were those things that were >> out? It It was only one thing and it's it was the the run at elevation. I'm not much of a runner. I'm not going to pretend like I am. I sprint. I jump. I love that stuff, but I don't run really. It's just not something I do. So, for that, the standard was it's a three mile run. And I think it was the goal was a eight minute lap, I want to say, or eight minute miles. For the three miles at elevation, 9,000 foot elevation. There was about maybe a thousand foot elevation change. It was two laps barefoot on granite pine needles crossing some there was a barbedwire fence crossing that you had to cross twice because it was two laps. And so that was the thing that I was like unsure of because one I've never ran a race at that elevation and two 200 lb 6'3 not a cross country runner by any means but I have really good barefoot conditioning and I can do pretty much anything I can do in shoes I can do barefoot for the most part. So that was just easy for me. But I I was sleeping

[33:34] in a hyperbaric oxygen deprivation tent that I borrowed from one of my clients in Bend and I was doing some track work specifically for that because that was the one I was like I don't know. And so I trained for it pretty thoroughly. And then the coach I won't throw anyone under the bus here. The coach that was pacing the first lap they said don't pass the pacer on the first lap. And they paced us a minute and a half or two minutes slow for the split that we needed to actually finish it within time. And so I had to drop that time on the second lap. I had to go a minute and a half faster than I would have paced my miles. Um, and I finished it right at the right time. I was the only one that passed it at the time. >> Yeah. There was only I think when I did that, it was a three-mile run. It wasn't 8minute mile pace. It was 9-minute mile pace. And it wasn't in where you described. It was like on an actual trail hit. >> Yeah. >> And I was not physically prepared for I'm from Miami, so below sea level. >> Yeah. And I didn't have access to a hyperaric chamber or anything like that down here to prep. So I decided to try and go up, but I didn't have enough knee

[34:34] weight. You should be up there 10 to 14 days before to kind of activate. I managed to get about seven days up front. But even the 5,000 ft of elevation hit because I got into Denver first and then we ended up going to Conifer and we were in Smith's property, Smith property, which is I think 8,000 elevation and then it was another grand and that kind of rushed. I remember having a bud scoop my way out of there because my feet were destroyed because it was like not pine needles, not grass, it was great rocks and gran and I was like, man, this is crazy. But yeah, and I'm glad that you prepared so thoroughly for me. >> Yeah. So, I still I still had to push it with that with that drop set on that last one. I was giving it everything I had and I finished it right on time and then people slowly trickled in after that. >> And and I will add your your I'll add to your plug on the newsletter. there's a a link on the newsletter that was sent out for the call for me and Lauren. So you guys click on that, it'll let let you get to that live call and schedule it. And then the second thing is how important that is. Oftent time I see

[35:36] from younger coaches, even older coaches that just don't have the experience, maybe they've got into it later in life is not understanding to program at the lowest level of competency of your client and not understanding how to regress or progress an activity. I'm not saying that movement is linear in any way, shape, or form. And you're proof of that. I mean, you did parkour when you were out of shape on an American diet. That just shows you that movement is really hierarchical, right? It can go up, down, side to side, in and out. And and there's evidence of that. Every LeBron James can't squat, but he could duck a basketball, right? So movement is not linear by any means, but it's very important for you to understand how to scaffold the technique when there's no decision making, right? if you're trying to improve a skill, how to regress and progress a pattern or movement and what the movement selection should be in general to achieve the end task that you're looking for. And I think this is an incredible opportunity. I mean, you're clearly a skilled coach that has provided for people who would pass that certifications because they worked. So, I'll assist that plug. All right, with

[36:39] that out of the way, moving on to the next thing. So, let's actually keep up on that on that vein. I know you computed your L3. Shelby was in your L3 and I think she reached out to you afterwards to get into coaching. What do you feel in your years of coaching? What is the thing that everybody aims to achieve with you? What is the biggest thing that you see or what are the top three things that you see? >> Yeah, the big thing that I help people with and maybe the reason why it's a little bit harder to understand up front because a lot of coaches online are selling transformations. They're selling to the lowest denominator of pain point. lose weight, get a six-pack, something like that. And MoveNet and what I do, we're more focused on quality of movement and all that kind of stuff. I think maybe it's the biggest surprise that people have when they work with me, or the thing that I focus on largely is understanding not only the wise, but the intent in your training, allowing yourself to triage and have flexibility. So, it's never all or nothing. And there's always something that you can

[37:40] do. If you have 10 minutes, if you have two hours, and and even outside of sanctioned training and self-care, say you did train for two hours in one day, that's still 22 hours that you are moving. What is the quality of your movement when you're not training? And so really bleeding into the education side of this sort of thing is where I find the most joy and the most value for people is training is the gateway drug that I net people on. And then it's like, oh yeah, but there's actually life on the other side of it. There's eating, sleeping, nutrition, relationships, how you think about your kids, how you raise your kids, everything outside of that. So, I don't know if that answers your question, but that's where my >> in reality, it's a person problem, right? It's never I want to learn this movement. It's never I just want to lose weight because I just want to lose weight inevitably turns into oh, it's not that you want to lose weight. It's you want to improve your relationship with those around you and the relationship with yourself. But that's a whole other psychological thing that we probably have to set up a different call and even maybe the root call and had that kind of conversation because you run into that. I did lifestyle

[38:42] modification was my niche when I was in the hospital. I've worked with people that were 5 foot three, 350 lbs, 22 years old and on a laundry list of medications. And I did my first 8 mile run and hike today. Told myself I needed to do something hard and I did it. Yeah. When you challenge yourself and you're able to accomplish it, it's an incredible thing. happy for you ritual. But when you deal with somebody who's had such a disregard for oneself for so long and and it's it's not a judgment. It's not saying that there's anything wrong with them. I I think it's the opposite. Those those individuals are incredibly powerful and they're incredibly strong in their own right because they continue to try despite the fact that they fail and eventually they will find success. It might be longer than everybody else just because their trials and tribulations are going to be different. the journeys that they set themselves on, the information that they got to, the path they went on, but the whole of the discussion. >> My point is that you make the attempt and I think you're right, training is the gateway, right? Because of the journeys that they set themselves on, the information that they got to, the

[39:43] path they went on. But that's a whole other discussion. >> Funny point is that you make the attempt. And I think you're right, training is the is the gateway drug, right? It's the gateway drug for people to start opening their eyes and realize that it's much more than movement, right? is it is what you eat. It is how you sleep. It is your energy. So all of those things are so incredibly important and incredibly overlooked and it's overlooked. And not to say that natural movement is the only solution, but it's overlooked across the entire board in the health and fitness industry, right? The majority of anybody who's talking anything about fitness is just about these are the seven exercises you need to do to get a big chest pump, you know? And we're also in a in an industry that's riddled with steroids and filters and all these different things and selling you something that may not necessarily be achievable uh to that to that certain person and I think they know that they're not going to achieve it. The naivity is there but they they launch at it because it gives them hope

[40:43] or an opportunity or something like that. >> So that is interesting to to see. But I figured that you from my conversations with you, I knew you probably try and treat the person as a whole and not just movement. I do want to end my comment with saying that like what you said weight loss or and you focus on quality. It's because we know that all of those things are a result of doing the thing. You know, like when somebody tells me, oh, the most important the most important uh metric is strength. I'm I'm always kind of like, no, strength is not the most important metric, right? Because strength is is a result of practice. Um, the most important metric when you're looking at performance is is recovery. Like, because you're not going to be able to perform if you're run down, if you're on the border of having a cold, if you sprained your ankle, doesn't matter how strong you are, if you can't there's a a bunch of other kind of things there that we can kind of discuss. Uh, do you have anything else to add or can I move on to the next? >> Yeah. Yeah. No, we can move on. Just jump around a little bit.

[41:44] >> All right. So you we talked about like you being a coach and and you recognizing that the challenge for an individual is uh making the switch the mental switch from it's not just what you've been doing in the past but it's about focusing on quality of movement using that as a gateway drug to get them to start exploring their own nutrition their own psychology their own relationships and their own things and I think that's an incredibly potent and important um thing to do when we get to how you got to your mindset to be able to coach. What were the biggest things that influenced you to start looking at people like people and not looking like not that you ever did anything different, but what was the thing that really started to make you move in this direction as a coach? What were the biggest influences? Yeah, I I I guess I've never I've thought I've taken time to think about a lot of things and that's one thing that I haven't I guess psychoanalyzed or really dug into the why that I think that way in particular.

[42:46] Um but maybe to expand a little bit more on the way that I think about it might be helpful. I I think about physical practice as a relationship with self. So, when I'm when I'm working with somebody, um I think that everyone has a physical practice. Whether or not they recognize that they do their physical practice might be so bad that you could liken it to an abusive relationship. It's just They don't know. They don't think about it. It's something that is they're on autopilot with their programming and environment dictating exactly what they're doing and they're not taking care of themselves. That is still a relationship. It's just a very poor relationship. So, it's on this continuum of the more intentional we get with the way that we treat ourselves and the more that we engage in the physical, it gives us empirical feedback to where we realize, okay, I'm really bad at this or I'm really good at this or like this is the truth of the matter rather than having an inflated sense of self. And so I think that oh I guess you know I think where this landed for me was my like big

[43:49] foray into physical activity was natural movement or parkour will you and you can't like parkour natural movement um jiu-jitsu martial arts these sorts of disciplines don't have much room for not truth for lies because if you can't do something and you physically attempt it, you get shut down real quick by gravity or the biggest guy in the room or something like that. And so I think building my physical relationship through the medium of parkour for the past 20 years and it was primarily the first like six to eight years where I was really training hard. Um, I just built such a realistic understanding of my own physical abilities to where there really wasn't much sense of ego or inflated anything. It was just like this is what I can do. This is what I can't do. And so, it really allowed me to have a lot of empathy for myself in that process because I would grapple mentally

[44:50] with really hard movements. I would, you know, take hours to work up to jumps that I was afraid of. And I I took the time to really do that deep digging. And I think that's what gave me that perspective. And then it really solidified it when I was able to start coaching people and seeing them go through those steps where the the example I always give and we would do this in my physical gym is you have a group of people. One person's up queued up to do the thing. The thing is a little jump and everybody like the person that's doing it knows they can do it but they're afraid to do it. They're building up to break that mental jump. And so they they're building this up in their head. everyone else in the room has done this themselves so they can have that physical empathy and they're right there with them. >> But you understand movement as a behavior and and that was something that the moment I saw that I was like oh this guy knows exactly what's up and you're this guy in the community that helps prepare people for their movement certifications. One thing that I wanted to so that's my background about how we've met and we've interacted and the

[45:51] one thing I wanted when I reached out to you the second time and I'm so grateful that you agreed to it was to have a conversation with somebody who is knows what they're doing in this industry in this field lives and breathes what they practice and we can open up the door to allow members of the natural movement community not just moved out as a whole I want to use that as a hub for just to open dialogue because I feel there's not enough opportunity for people to just communicate without ego and without because a lot of people I was mentioning this on a couple of calls ago, people have imposter syndrome, right? They're scared to ask for help because of whatever position they may hold in life or or they're scared to ask for help because they're scared to look a certain way. And a lot of people fake it without making it. And then they we have a whole other subsection of people that are professionals in their own right, but they don't lean on people to gain insight or learn some mentoring or gain this one thing that truly appreciate you for taking the call. And that's my long- winded inter introduction to anybody who doesn't know who you are. >> Well, thank you. I appreciate the

[46:51] community aspect of all this stuff and totally understand. Sometimes people just see vanity metrics and think that people are making money and they might not be making any money or somebody has a small following. They might be really talented and know what they're talking about and be making a lot more money than somebody and and when I say making money, I mean providing value for people in exchange obviously for making a living. But thanks for the introduction. It was probably a lot less than that what I was pitching. But >> the first thing I want to talk and ask you just to get a little bit more background of you was how did this all start? How did you turn into the animal you are? Because if you see you on the internet, you're gradating like an orangutang. You can pinch grip 200 pounds. You're obviously a very skilled mover. high level. Have you always been that way or is it something that was new to you? Something you discovered late in life or were you always active? >> Yeah, I would say I was always active, but I was never never an athlete. Came to being more of an athlete much later in life. I didn't grow up playing sports. And while I say I was active, I really enjoyed watching action movies and trying to go jump off hop fences,

[47:53] jump off roofs, and do all that kind of stuff. I was always I really struggled because I had a really poor standard American diet. I didn't have a whole lot of role models. I didn't play sports. Wasn't very healthy when I was a lot younger. And so, it wasn't until my sophomore year in high school that I actually found parkour. And then that really just sent me down the path that I'm on today. I suppose >> that was the thing that that changed it for you was parkour. From what I'm hearing, when you were young, you were so into action, like action movies, that you just wanted to do all the cool stuff. >> Yeah. I think it was I've talked about since the podcast, too. I have this idea that entertainment was not purely consumptive preocial media where we we would see something and then want to actually try and emulate it, try and be it. And that was definitely the case for me. And I think what really separated it though is when I found parkour, it something switched in my brain where it gave me permission as an adult to try and pursue this as a young adult still in high school to try and take it more seriously and try and figure out why I struggled to be an athlete, struggled to be fast, struggled to do all the things

[48:54] I wanted when I was younger. And so that led me to diet, nutrition, and more like a more of a holistic approach. And I guess one interesting segue here is for me it was parkour and seeing other adults doing it that gave me that permission. And I see what I see move doing in the community a lot for people as well is people seeing it. It's out of the ordinary for them and then it somehow gives them permission or gives them insight into moving in a way that isn't just like clinical gym work that isn't something that they may have tried before. So for me it was definitely that was the foot in the door to really believe that it was something I could pursue long term as an adult. And then I guess to answer kind of your question of how I got to where I am now is just 20 years. It'll be 20 years next year since I found parkour. And from there it wasn't just parkour. It was studying a lot of different modalities, working with a lot of mentors, a lot of coaches, cross-disciplinary. What was the biggest impact? >> I I guess I've thought I've taken time to think about a lot of things and that's one thing that I haven't I psychoanalyzed or really dug into the

[49:56] why that I think that way in particular. Maybe to expand a little bit more on the way that I think about it might be helpful. I I think about physical practice as a relationship with self. So when I'm working with somebody, I think that everyone has a physical practice. Whether or not they recognize that they do, their physical practice might be so bad that you could liken it to an abusive relationship. It's just They don't know. They don't think about it. It's something that is they're on autopilot with their programming and environment dictating exactly what they're doing. They're not taking care of themselves. That is still a relationship. It's just a very poor relationship. So, it's on this continuum of the more intentional we get with the way that we treat ourselves and the more that we engage in the physical, it gives us empirical feedback to where we realize, okay, I'm really bad at this or I'm really good at this or this is the truth of the matter rather than having an inflated sense of self. And so I think that oh I guess you know I think where this landed for me was my like big

[50:58] foray into physical activity was natural movement or parkour will you and you can't parkour natural movement jiu-jitsu martial arts these sorts of disciplines don't have much room for not truth for lies because if you can't do something and you physically attempt it, you get shut down real quick by gravity or the biggest guy in the room. And so I think building my physical relationship through the medium of parkour for the past 20 years and it was primarily the first like six to eight years where I was really training hard. I just built such a realistic understanding of my own physical abilities to where there really wasn't much sense of ego or inflated anything. It was just this is what I can do, this is what I can't do. And so it really allowed me to have a lot of empathy for myself in that process because I would grapple mentally with really hard movements. I would take hours to work up

[51:59] to jumps that I was afraid of. And I I took the time to really do that deep digging. And I think that's what gave me that perspective. And then it really solidified it when I was able to start coaching people and seeing them go through those steps where the the example I always give and we would do this in my physical gym is you have a group of people, one person's up queued up to do the thing. The thing is a little jump and everybody the person that's doing it knows they can do it but they're afraid to do it. They're building up to break that mental jump and so they they're building this up in their head. everyone else in the room has done this themselves so they can have that physical empathy and they're right there with them. their palms are sweating too and they're thinking about them making this little jump and then when they finally work up the courage to say all right master the mind and say I know I can do it and they do the little jump it's amazing everyone claps everyone shares in that moment with them and and that's where I think that that relationship with self and navigating towards the truth of our physical abilities helps us in every other facet

[52:59] of our life because it dispels delusion and it allows us to be a little bit more real. Bit of a bit of a run on there, but >> No, no, no. 100%. So, one of the biggest influences were your own personal experiences, right? Whether >> Yeah. With with with the discipline that that was was that way and because even to that point, there are people that practice martial arts and have no idea just do katas and believe they're the baddest guy in the room, but they've never actually fought. They've never Yeah. And so I think by doing a discipline like parkour and there are others, but by doing one that forced me to actually face reality every single training session, it allowed me to build that mindset to a very deep level. And then the freedom that I found encouraged me to help other people find that freedom. And it doesn't have to be parkour. It could be anything, anything that they want to do, but finding that freedom. And I think that that's what really built up that that mindset. >> Nice. Any any books that influenced you? Yeah. So, a funny thing about me is I

[53:59] read pretty prolifically now. I was pretty slow in academia as a kid. I didn't learn to read until way later than the average kid. And then I didn't finish a book until I graduated high school. I was not a reader, man. And I I just cheated my way through high school. And it taught me how to game school. Figured out it was like all about, you know, getting grades at that point. And everyone else was trying to memorize stuff. So, I just figured out how to play the system. But when I graduated high school, I finished my first book and it was actually the original 1912 Edgar Riceboro's Tarzan of the Apes and I read through the entire series of 25 books and I think that I actually learned a lot about humanity psychology not all for the first time in the book but again like we were saying it was a sounding board and it really solidified a lot of my beliefs. One of the ones that came out of that too was in one of the books there is an actor I think is out of the the states that goes to Africa and looks just like Tarzan and he plays this impostor that tries to you know there's some plot but he's an

[55:00] imposttor that pretends to be Tarzan but he doesn't have any of the skills that Tarzan has didn't have the upbringing doesn't have the neurology doesn't have the mind doesn't have the values and so he he was a bodybuilder with a similar physique and it was to me that was the first time that I was like okay it's you know it's the mind that separates us it's not the body it's how you get what you get really matters and so tons and tons of takeaways with that and I think ultimately that led me to come up with this brand and to be enamored with a lot of Edgar Ice's work >> you reminded me of when you said that you didn't really read much until you got out of high school I had a friend growing up that was not a reader didn't read in elementary school didn't read in middle school didn't read in high school very much by just by gaining the system and got older and got into sales, received sales training, worked at an appliance company and I think after two years he comes to me and asks me to start training him >> and at this point he's very wealthy at this point I think he's somehow making

[56:01] over a million dollars selling appliances and he walks up to me and he goes you know what's crazy and I was like what he goes how much information there is in books he had started reading and I started cracking up because this guy who's my millionaire he started started reading in his 20s and walks up to me and he's like, "Man, books are crazy." He's like, "I don't know how nobody reads." And he's like, "I don't know how I went so long not reading so much about anything. It's it really is something that is so obvious and it's so just the moment you do it, you're like, "This is pretty good." And even audiobooks for some people, some of those who don't like to read, there just so much information you can find anywhere. That's crazy. Now that you're saying it to me, I see it because you essentially are Tarzan. You're like almost a modern day Tarzan. So it's like perfect. >> Okay. So the personal experiences, you having to create the discipline to challenge yourself and overcome some of those challenges and those barriers, putting people in the same room, people who have been successful to have that empathy as a group. You reading Tarzan,

[57:01] which helped you kind of understand the psychology and put things in place and that that thing you mentioned with the bodybuilder that was portraying Tarzan but couldn't do what Tarzan did because he didn't have the mindset, the neurology, the upbringing, the all things. Let's flip it on its head and somewhere else. What how did you overcome because I imagine you didn't jump and do everything perfect, right? How did you deal with failure? How did you deal with not making the jump? How did you deal with discovering gravity? >> Yeah, I think that well good at failing and good at >> the best saying that's the best saying you could have ever said and I will I'll piggy back on. >> I feel like you live under a rock if you don't know that the master has failed more times than the apprentice. That's just kind of the thing now. But I I would have to attribute a lot of my tenacity and creativity to my father, my upbringing, and then also even not reading until high school. I had to be way more creative. The other people just read it and got the answers. I had to come up with the answers without reading. So like finding obstacles,

[58:01] overcoming obstacles mentally and physically has served me so much in life. and o overcoming obstacles physically with parkour and and grappling with those mental challenges like you're saying or the physical challenges that I call mental challenges because I think it's all comes back to the psychology and the mental and that's the beauty of it too is you really can't rightfully disassociate the physical and the mental and we try now and I think that's really where we are and I think that's why a resurgence like move on a larger level is so vital is because we have tried to separate these two things that can't be separated and that's why we have people identifying as Jim Bros and being meattheads versus the biggest guy on that is a philosopher, you know, and so yeah, I I just think >> it's like the nerdiest guy. It's usually not the biggest guy on the map. It's usually the nerdiest guy in the mat is the most guy in the >> where like just like this Zeus figure is also just totally heady. I think that we need to find it back a merging of the two. And and I think that if if I can do anything with my brand and with fitness,

[59:02] it's really to drive home the idea that it's not about being fit. It's that if you're not fit, everything in life is harder. It's just an integration. We need we need both. And especially for women, and I and I find myself working with a lot of women, a lot of moms, not because I decided to or tried to seek out any avatar or niche, but I feel like, okay, maybe this is a really really good segue here. So, when I had my physical gym, I had the same thing, too. I had a lot of mothers, just badass mothers, mothers that were just crushing it. And to answer your question of why women in general and especially mothers have this relationship with things being hard and overcoming things in a way that the man or the the boy that becomes a man that didn't have to struggle to gain their strength, they had way more testosterone. They were naturally strong. They had brothers that lifted. They did it in high school. They played football. It's just easy, a shoein. But then you have, you know, a woman that may or may not have had a physical background, goes through, has kids, and then that breaks you down and evolves you into another human, and then you

[60:04] have to evolve on the back side of that and gain your strength back and do a lot of things. And so I think going through those trials really showed me that some of the most badass people are women in their postpartum 30s and 40s and then the guys kind of go downhill after it was easy and they don't know how to work hard. And so Shelby's such a inspiration in so many ways. Like you said, I've been working with her since I think 2020 22. And right now she's closing in on 18 strict pull-ups with a dead hang. And she just turned 40 and she's crushing it with the parkour stuff, the move stuff, the the jiu-jitsu stuff, the ninja warrior stuff. And like >> yeah, I'm trying to I'm trying to get Shelby as a TI. I've been negotiating with her on the side like, "Hey, how do I get you to join movement? Be a TI for it." And I think she she could be such a huge influence in the community >> and and a great teacher and a great instructor for anybody who wants to get the the education from the move system. She's done it all. She's an L3. She's she's actually gone through the system. So I think she would be incredible. So

[61:04] I'm still working on but you're 100% right. I want to highlight something you said. I'm really good at failing that I don't think anybody understands how important that is. And and I'll say it from a martial arts perspective. I I do jiu-jitsu and brono Brazilian jiu-jitsu off Miami grappling and the one thing I see people rolling and grappling and fighting is nobody wants to they just have this crazy thing of just with their whole heart and life like if there's a world championship on the line when they first jiu-jitsu and they just >> kill themselves in the first two minutes and then they can't do anything else. >> Yeah. >> And it's such a funny thing because I'm phenomenal with it. I've I've I I have no problems failing. I have no egos. For me, I've been arm barred a trillion times. >> Fail quick. Fail quick, learn fast. >> Fail fast. Not armbar me. It's not an expert, but it's very challenging for somebody to catch me on. But 100% failure is the stepping stone to success. >> With that caveat within the fail fast thing, it's fail fast, learn from it,

[62:07] take from it, change what you do. Don't fail the same way over and over again. >> That is the second piece. If you fail, you have to that the mind to be like, why did I fail? >> How do I not fail like that again? >> Well, and one thing I I teach everyone that I work with how to juggle three ball. Three ball is really simple. Everyone should learn how to do. If you're listening to this, go home, learn how to do it. Ask me. I'll send you a free tutorial. But within that, it's a little proxy because you fail very quickly. And one of my good friends and mentors, Keegan Smith, talks about this juggling's been his gateway piece for a long time, too, where the only way you fail is if you don't throw the balls. That's true failure. And with juggling, you throw the balls and you drop them immediately. You're failing. You're thinking intentionally about what your intent is, how you're going to do it. So, you're failing, restructuring it, paying attention to what your goal is with each throw, and you're just failing, failing, failing. Then, you get it. Almost every client improves in a couple sessions. In a couple weeks, they're juggling. By tossing yourself into something that might feel daunting, might be challenging, and then seeing measurable success in a very compressed

[63:07] time window, it changes your brain. It starts to make failing on a slightly bigger scale easier. >> That was the juggling was the final exam at Miami Dates Colleg's speech class. Miami date college in Kendall campus. There was a professor who taught speech and you had two two final exams. You had two choices. You either had to give a presentation on the most embarrassing moment of your life in front of the entire class or learn how to juggle before the end of the semester. And you would see how many people would be like, "I'm gonna learn how to juggle." And then they would freak out when they were like, "This is so hard." But then you would catch people. And then another crazy thing in Miami, we have a guy who runs around. I don't know who this person is, but you'll see him if I'm driving down US1 in Miami. Outside, this guy will be running shirtless and shorts and he's juggling or he's juggling a football, a soccer ball, and a skateboard or something like that. and he's just juggling but right next to the highway on the sidewalk right next to US1 and he's running and

[64:08] juggling and people are driving. I'm like, "What the hell is this guy doing?" And in my head, the first time I saw him, man, I hope he doesn't I hope he doesn't lose one of those and it goes right onto my windshield, but you see him every now and then running and juggling all throughout Miami. That's what he's I don't know if he's famous for it, but you see him I've never seen him on Instagram or anything like that, but >> Well, well, he's famous for it now. >> Yeah. juggling, overcoming failure, failing fast, learning from your failures, and being successful. Next thing, let's get into the entrepreneurship aspect of coaching. You've obviously had a physical gym, you work with clients online, you've been in this journey for 20 years of your life. If you had to go back in time and you had all the skill set you have now, the physique you have now and you were 17, 18, 19, 20 years old, what would be the first thing that you would be like, I need to get this or if you had all the knowledge, not all the skills, if you had all the knowledge of what you would become, what would be the first thing

[65:09] you would work on? >> Well, I guess maybe a two-part answer. I'm a firm believer that you have to get good at the thing. And so that that's that's not in the business side of it per se. It applies a little bit, but I'm talking about if you want to be a physical coach, in my opinion, you have to have walked that path. You have to do it. You have to lead by example. And that's going to take a certain amount of time. And depending on who your mentors are. I guess the the advice I'd have is it's hard to answer. If I already had all those answers, then I would just do it all quicker. But I wouldn't have those answers if I didn't have the mentors and the coaches and the people that I had. one aspect that slowed me down that I wouldn't change and the one aspect that slowed me down that I would change. The one that I would change is I would get in the room with the people that are already doing what I want to do faster. I wouldn't take the time to try and reinvent anything. And I I I never approached it with much ego or I wanted to reinvent it. I just didn't really see how powerful compressing that time window is by finding those mentors, finding those peers, finding those

[66:11] coaches, whether it's sales, whether it's the back end of business, whether it's the training. When I was learning how to do handstands, it took me a couple years of failing almost the exact same way until I found got together with coach Summers from Gymnastics Bodies. He was a junior national team coach in the US and he taught me how to do a real handstand. And then I was like, "All right, done. I could have done that way faster. Those are the sorts of things that I would have that would change. >> The things that I wouldn't change is >> I very intentionally made less money, worked slower, sacrificed progress in the traditional sense for the relationship that I have with my wife, the relationship that I have with my kids, the life that I've led while learning these skills. That will inevitably slow you down. But if you think about it as slowing you down, you're thinking about it wrong because that is the whole point of life. And no matter how much money I have, if I have a horrible relationship with my wife and my kids, none of it's worth it. The same

[67:13] sort of the back back end of that too, and I always try and remind clients of this too, is there are no true arrival moments. I still have not arrived in business, in training, in anything. But if you think that you can wait for some false arrival to take care of your physical body, you are sorely mistaken. And that's the one piece of advice there. Maybe twofold where one, I wouldn't I wouldn't speed up the aspect of trading time with my family to work harder and more. But on the flip side, or I would get in with the coaches much faster. And and this year, I've spent the most money that I've ever spent on coaches and mentors in my life. and and it's just expedited things in my business and training and it's just the way that it is. Yeah. >> Well, not just your business and training, but mental somebody told mental capital, cognitive capital, it's like you're because it I don't I can't overstate or understate how important it is to surround yourself with the right people. And the second thing you say, not reinvent the wheel. I used to get made fun of because I would

[68:15] outsource concepts or ideas to expedite my learning process >> and a lot of my colleagues or friends growing up are like, "Oh, just do it yourself." And I'm like, "Just do it myself. Why would I reinvent the wheel? This person's already figured it out. I want to learn from them." And then from there, you refine, you refine it. But for you, you refine it for you. You try and make it unique to what you do. My my jiu-jitsu coach is incredible. And I don't fight like everybody else. I I roll a very specific way because it's unique to me, but I so it's like I'm not here to reinvent the wheel even move that now as direct. I've outsourced a lot of the things the I'm not going to sit there and try and figure out how to build a website. I hired the right people in place to fix the website which is why the website I'm trying to put the best people in place around me to get things moving in the direction I want to move. I don't I'm not here to to reinvent anything. I I want to learn what it is that I want to internalize it. I want to use what's advantageous to me. what has made me successful with Brian, what what my superpowers are and I want to refine that for me on how I

[69:15] can teach it, expedite it or share it with others. And I think that's the most important thing. And you saying that there are no true arrival moments is correct because your path is never linear. It's but it's undulating with a progressive hopefully increase. Obviously, you're going to have these moments where you hit rock bottom. Unfortunately, I've been there, too. But when you hit rock bottom, the best part of that is you can't get any lower. So now you have the opportunity to build back up. Hopefully with everything that got you to rock bottom, you can go up way to work. Well, Lawrence, I have to get on a call on a 10 p.m. call. But this was, I think, incredible and I think it's going to be very very insightful for the community as a whole. I'm I'm glad that we were able to have this conversation in public. And I asked anybody who was on this call, if you want to reach out to Lauren and you want to have a conversation with Lauren, do it. He's he'll answer you. He answered me when I was nobody. So, uh, not that I'm anybody now. And >> yeah, that and the illusion to, yeah, if you have no followers on Instagram or if you have 40,000 followers or whatever, that's one of the beautiful things for me is that I just love connecting with

[70:17] people in general. And that that's the whole reason that I coach and so >> you do. >> Nobody's a nobody. >> I urge anybody to reach out to me and I extend the same offer to anybody who needs to reach out to me, communicate with me, anything about anything, I'm here. I'm actually pretty responsive. There's already people in the community who reach out that are surprised that I that I actually answer, but I do. So, I wish everybody has a wonderful night. Lauren, we'll be in touch. We'll be in in conversation. I hope you have a wonderful night and thank you again. >> Yeah, thank you too, man. Have a good night. >> Take care. Good night.
