TITLE: The Power of the Get-Up
VIDEO ID: 9PcHMzl45rg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9PcHMzl45rg
UPLOAD DATE: 2025-08-21
DURATION: 15:51
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:01] Hey, it's Brian Benort, the director of performance and curriculum at Movenat, and I'm happy to be here at Non-stop Physical Therapy with Dr. Mario Valdez. >> Dr. Mario Valdez. I'm the founder and owner of Non-Stop Physiootherapy and recovery. I'm also a board-certified orthopedic clinical specialist, and I'm happy to be here helping out Brian go through this movement assessment of the Get Up. >> Why are we using the Get Up? Today, we're going to be talking about the Get Up as an assessment outside of the use of traditional physical therapy assessments to essentially assess your client to determine what their movement competency is. To follow, you're going to see three people getting up off of the ground. And the first task is getting up without the use of your hands. We're trying to see what the level of movement competency is and what strategies are used to solve that problem. If you can't get up without the use of your hands, then you'll have the ability to use your hands to get up. And

[01:02] from there, you can determine what your client's lowest level of movement competency is. And then from there, you can kind of determine what's going to be the best course of action in terms of programming and creating a movement plan for your client. Mario here is going to assist in describing, explaining, and showing you guys the additional screenings you can use to help get your clients in the direction that they need to get to to moving better. Hey, hey, hey. Heat. Heat. N.

[02:08] All right. So when we look at the get up as an assessment, there's really only a couple of ways that somebody can get up off the ground, right? So why is this assessment so important and why is it so useful? So first thing is when someone's laying on the ground, they're going to have two options without getting up their hands, right? They have to have a lot of abdominal activation to be able to sit up. So that's one thing you can already check off the box. Do they have the ability to control the musculature of their core to create enough stability to get into a seated position? A second one is to know whether they know how to body weight shift and transfer their body weight to a different position on the ground. So they could be laying flat

[03:10] and then they can rock into the bottom position and then from here make a determination of what's going to be the best option to get up. Now the first option regardless of the leg orientation whether it's figure four, whether it's cross, however you get to a half kneeling position, right? I can get there from here. I can get there from here and then build a foot up. This kind of orientation of getting up is a split squat to stand, right? Or a lunge to stand. The other option is getting into the bottom of a squat position, right? Whether that's from rocking and being comfortably in a deep squat and being able to stand from here and come back down or some people are really good and they can access that position right from the bottom. I got lucky there. It doesn't always happen, right? So squatting is the other position. Those are the two major primary positions you're going to be able to get up without the use of your hands. But always the ending orientation is going to generally be a split squat or a squat pattern. The third one that's a little bit less accessible to a lot of people is this cross squat position. And from here, shifting your body weight forward

[04:10] and then standing up on the outsides of your feet to get up. The the fourth position is a deep hip hinge, which usually requires a hand. So when you see somebody get up from like a a prone position, they might walk their hands back and they'll use their hand as opposed to be in a hip hinge position and then stand up. And then the other final position is going to be what's called a deep knee bend, right? So having the toe extension and stability in the foot and the ankle and the knees, the mobility in the knees to be able to stand. So why is all of this important? Well, when someone is getting off of the ground, they're going to bias whatever they feel safe doing or whatever they know they can do. So, if every time they get up, it's a split squat, the question would be, why are you avoiding the squat, right? Or the deep squat. Is it because you don't have ankle mobility? Is it because you don't have the hip mobility? Is it because you don't have the knee mobility? Um, that is going to give you kind of a a a guide as to how to program for your client. Because if you see they're only getting a split squat, that means they have one solution

[05:10] for the problem. So now you have in your mind, oh, there might be an ankle mobility issue. And then you can check that with a screen. Oh, the ankle mobility turned out to be fine. Well, now we got to check the hip mobility. Maybe they don't have enough external rotation. Maybe they don't have enough internal rotation. So these are the things you can check and that's what Dr. Mario is going to be describing as we move forward. But to summarize, the first thing to do is determine what the the pattern is that they kind of bias the most. Second is if they're biasing a pattern, what patterns are they avoiding and what could be involved in those patterns? So, for instance, a squat is probably going to be an ankle mobility kind of thing. If they're avoiding this position because they can't get up from this position, it could just be a strength issue. And then, you know, when you're programming, you can use an assisted split squat, things like that to help teach somebody to move better. So, one of the things that we noticed with Michaela was that she never got into the full squat pattern when we were having to do her get-ups. So, one of the first things that I like to check is always ankle mobility because that tends to be the culprit a good amount of the

[06:11] time, right? So, for that in the clinic, one of the easiest tests that I use is a 5-in wall test, right? And instead of doing it up and against the wall, I've come to start using like a PVC pipe and I'll have the client kind of kneel on a foam pad in a half kneeling position. And from here, I'll just use my hand, which is about five inches. So, I'll put the base of my pinky on her big toe, and then I'll put the other end of the PVC on my thumb. And then my instruction to the client is, okay, I want you to drive that knee towards the PVC without lifting up your heel, right? So, I can cue her, right? And I can put my hand behind her heel to see if she's lifting up. And obviously there, she's got about three finger lengths before she reaches the PVC pipe. We can go ahead and test this bilaterally. So, go ahead and switch legs. Same thing. And there she's about the same, about

[07:12] three fingers length. Then what I could do is I could take her to the table, which we'll show in a different part of the video, um, where I could do some passive joint integrity to see if she actually has some stiffness in that joint capsule. So two of the most common things that can limit range of motion at any joint is stiffness of the joint capsule itself or any tightness of the muscles crossing the joint. Right? So for the ankle I usually like to assess you know ankle dorsif flexion or what we call posterior glide of the tis on the tibia and fibula. Right? So for that I just come in here and I give her a posterior glide and I can say that that is stiff. Right? And then I also like to check what's her passive range look like. And I could say that that's probably also stiff, right? So Michaela's case, right, treatment wise, I would probably be doing some soft tissue, you know, scraping, cupping to the calf, also followed by some, you know, higher grade levels of mobilization or even a joint manipulation to the ankle to improve her

[08:13] dorsif flexion. So, another one of the culprits that we suspect in Michaela since she would never access the deep squat pattern while she was getting up is hip external rotation, right? And this one I usually can test actively. Me personally, I'll just kind of take the PA patient through it passively and that looks like this, right? So, I'll take the patient and I'll flex their hip to about 90°, right? And then I'm externally rotating them. So, what I'm looking for here is can they achieve about 45 degrees? we can get more specific and we can use a gonometer to measure to see exactly how many degrees of rotation she has, right? But in Michaela's case, right, I can suspect that she has the 45 degrees. So, I would say the majority of her issue for not accessing a deep squat pattern is probably coming from her ankle. But let's say I wanted to confirm, right, she has the mobility in her hip. Can she access it actively? Right? So, I'm going to have Michaela sit off the edge of the table. I'm going to come around here. I'm going to have her slide back. So your knees are touching up against the table. And then I'm going to have her slide this one out of the way. And then

[09:14] I want to see, can you externally rotate your legs? So bring your foot in this way. Right? And then if I did take a gonometric measurement, right? I would compare passive range to active range. Right? If her active range equals her passive range, then it's good. If her passive range is greater than her active range, then it's a motor coordination problem. We need to work on strengthening her hip external rotators to be able to access the range of motion she has available. So, not all of us are physical therapists, but you know, some of us out there are trainers or in in the move case, you're move certified trainer. So, what would you do to work with Michaela in terms of her ankle mobility? What floor? What natural movements can we use to work on that? So, here's kind of the first one. Let's turn you to the side a little bit. The first one is this kneeling position, right? So, go ahead and kneel all the way down to your ankles. And then what I want you to do is gently place your hands to your side. And we're just going to do an ankle mobilization with her own weight. So, you're just going to try and lift your own leg up gently. Try and lift your own knee up while keeping the foot down. Yeah. And you don't have to take it too far, but you can gently just

[10:14] work that pattern to where they feel comfortable. If if it's like uncomfortable, you can use a a bolster or something to raise the pattern or position. And then the second one we're going to do is actually let's get our toes involved and let's just not focus purely on the ankle, but let's focus on the foot in its entirety. So, we can get extension of the toes too. And then gently, let's rock side to side. In these positions, you don't want it to be stressful or strainous to the participant. So, you would do, you know, make sure it's nasal breathing. Everything is soft. Nothing should feel jarring. You know, you don't want that nervous system to kick in and start guarding. All right. So, this is something you can play between these two positions. The next one we're going to do is we're going to sit down. You're going to sit on one foot like on your shin. And then we're going to take our other foot and put it forward like that. And now I want you to take your forearm and place it over your knee. And then gently, what you're going to do is glide your knee over your toe. Exactly. And you're trying to keep this down as much as you can. And then as you get to the end, I want you to think like a little rainbow. Go from your big toe to your little toe. Like a little rainbow side to side. And really be exploratory in

[11:15] the in the pattern. It should kind of feel nice, right? And then you can just touch the position. Come back out. Touch the position. What's interesting is because you're sitting on this heel, you're mobilizing and kind of massaging that back leg or the bottom leg. And then here, you can play around with this position. And then we can go ahead and switch do the same thing on the other side. And then we can, you know, apply the same concept. So I can move around that bottom leg. And then I can go ahead and play with this kind of top position here. >> This one's definitely more limited. >> You probably feel it like it's it's way tighter than you'd like it to be. And then gently just go forward in and out of the position. And then the last one is a much more kind of comfortable position. It's just like a tall half kneel. And then from this tall half kneel, you're going to shift your weight forward and reach. And the reason why we use the reach is to get you to shift your body weight and be exploratory. So use this hand and reach like if you're Yeah. And reach in different places. It doesn't always have to be forward. It doesn't always have to be the same hand, right? Because as you reach in a

[12:17] different place, it's going to force your body weight into a different position. It's going to force your intent into a different position. And it's going to force your foot to try and match whatever is going on there. And relax. And then the last thing we'll do, so we we've worked the ankle, is then to repattern. And if she was not having access to that deep squat, we can use something like a pull. So let's come over here. You're going to use this pull. And you can just work your way around the barbell here. And just slowly get down to as deep as you can. You can adjust your foot width as much as you can. Get as deep as you can. And then just walk back up the pull. And as you do that, you're going to use shift your body weight back as you get into the position. Yep. And then start going back, back, back. Beautiful. Look at that. And then from there, come back up. Let's just do two more. And then on the last one, I want to keep you at the bottom. And I want you to shift your weight from side to side. And then I also want you to have the intent of bringing my knees kind of away from each other. Right? So this is your last one. Stay down at the bottom. Knees will kind of go away. And then you can shift your

[13:17] weight from side to side. And you can see how your foot has to take on load, how your ankle has to take on load. And here the most important thing is you recognizing what's tense and what's relaxed. and it shouldn't feel jarring, it shouldn't feel tough. And then you can go ahead and come back up. And then those are some natural ways that you would go to try and repattern the squat and also gain a little bit more access into the ankle. So to summarize what we experienced, right, we're talking about using the getup as a way of assessing your client's motor competency and which way you can program. And what we saw were three different people getting up from the floor in several different ways, some with limitations and some without limitations. And then what we did was we had a hypothesis. That person always biased X movement. In our case, it was the split squat. They couldn't access the deep squat. So how can you now reinforce your hypothesis by checking now the joints as you would in a traditional physical therapy screen. So Mario, you did the 5 in wall test. >> Wall test, >> right? So then we kind of confirmed with Michaela that her ankles are probably

[14:19] the main culprit into reason why she's picking the split squat as her pattern and avoiding the deep squat. And then I showed some interventions that I do manual therapy wise on the table with my patients to be able to increase some of that range of motion. And then Brian kind of showed more natural ways to reinforce that range of motion. And honestly I think the best thing is to do a little bit of both. Right? Even when Brian's not here in the clinic with me, you know, a lot of the stuff is manual therapy followed by some corrective type stuff, right? Some corrective movement patterns. So, definitely finding yourself a good physical therapist that can work with somebody like Brian who's experienced in more of the movement stuff and then us on the physical therapy side, which also, you know, movement experts, right? And blending both of those two together is obvious obviously the best way to kind of help your clients. >> Yeah, 100%. because in reality it's it may be an actual dysfunction, injury, pain thing, something that's kind of in the way that's blocking their access to perform the movement. Sometimes it's just simple oh, oh, I forgot that was even an option. And then sometimes it's an actual like mobility or what people

[15:20] like to call dysfunction. I don't like to think of it like that. I just like to can you be effective in the position, right? Movement is a behavior designed to solve a problem. What better problem to solve than getting up off the floor to see how well your participant moves? And then from there, you can make decisions on how to program for your client. So, I hope this helps you understand that you don't need a crazy battery of tests to figure out how your participant moves, especially if they're not coming to you in pain. Probably the easiest thing to do is just get them to get off the floor.
