TITLE: The Next Evolution of MovNat: A Conversation with Erwan Le Corre & Brian Betancourt
VIDEO ID: EmN2ON_VIXY
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EmN2ON_VIXY
UPLOAD DATE: 2025-06-25
DURATION: 24:06
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:01] Why did you start moving the physical education program that I wish I had received in school? Millions of people never did what exactly is going to be different. Can you tell? Lactate is the precursor to your happiness. What? I'm going to do the certification and it changed my life. Ah, let's roll. We completely forgot. It's just you and I. Yeah. Yeah. It's me and you having a conversation. Exactly. Um, it's rolling already. Yeah. Yeah, it is. It's pretty wild. Isn't it great to be here? It's good to reconnect, you know, back in uh December when we uh we met. It was it was like uh it was something that needed to happen. It was like destiny almost. So, it was it was it was like a really cool kind of moment when we went we had dinner at the sushi restaurant and we had those

[01:01] conversations about uh moved and now we're here where we are. So, um Austin, Texas now, right? Right now, months months later, you know, five five months, six months later, time flies, right? And who could tell we're actually we're in the heart of a city? But look at that. That's where we want to be. Yeah. Yeah, that's where the energy is good. Yeah. Yeah. And that same kind of like energy seems like what we're propagating forward with uh with Moven 2.0. What? Moven 2.0. Why is that? So before we get there, why don't we give a little history lesson to some of the audience? So like why did you start move? I started move because it was missing. It was missing. That's the way I train. But nobody else was training that way. Very few people, very very few people. And um somehow I designed move because it's a

[02:03] method. It's not just a practice. It's not just go in the woods, do whatever you want, be wild. You know, it's like it's systematic. It's a method. Why? Because most people do not know how to operate their body through these natural movements, but in a way that's efficient and safe. So how do we take them there? Safe safely. Safely with and effectively efficiently through progressions so that they don't have to figure out because if you tell anybody mo most people just go in the woods and you'll figure it out. They may not even go in the woods or they go there and they're like, I don't know what to do. Yeah, I don't know how to organize this and maybe I can try to jump, but I don't even know if I'm doing something right. If you think about it, it's a little like um a martial art because the martial art, the mix movement arts, mix martial arts of real world physical capability. Because

[03:05] let's say you wanted to be a good fighter. What do you do? You're not going in the street and be like, "Hey, what's up?" Uh, and you start fighting with somebody and that's how you got to learn. That makes no sense. No, you go learn with people who know, people who are trained, people who are experts and start learning what techniques and then the the conditioning is going to to follow along. And you can also add conditioning to to make your techniques even more powerful. Well, apply that mentality to move that and to to to running to jumping and landing, hanging, climbing, lifting and carrying and throwing, catching, etc., etc., etc. Then you have a whole deal of techniques that you need to learn and they need to train to become good at them and then what happens next that you become really competent, capable, your movement competency like, right? Exactly. So for that we need a method and my study showed me that such method to a degree existed in the past. There's a it's a

[04:06] long line of people. So basically I'm not the only one. I'm not the first one and I'm not the last one. um one of the guys on the it's a long line of people of physical educators that have been bringing this approach to to physical training in the past and we'll also do that in the future and we are move what we're doing is to prepare the next generations and I just want to add this somehow move is the physical education program that I wish I had received believed in school. Yeah. And I didn't. Yeah. Right. And millions of people never did. And imagine what your life, people's life and society would become if from an early age, you would learn all Yeah. Yeah. If everybody was more capable, I think it would transition to like not just you move well, but your life and interactions with others are improved, right? Because

[05:07] you you're not you don't have this insecurity about yourself, right? which is the the I feel like the root of a lot of issues and interactions with individuals like you run into somebody who's like not secure and then they become like defensive but that's a whole different conversation. True. So I know you built up Movenat to a certain extent and then you kind of stepped away for a little bit to just kind of let Movenat operate in itself. I stepped into Moenat in 2020 getting certified my L1 and L2 with uh John Murray and I remember when I was getting into MoveNet, it was I had worked for a very high-end boutique fitness gym. The pandemic hit, everything kind of shut down and very famous boutique gym. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We don't have to name names, but but I was like, "Oh man, uh I want to write something to help people program for themselves." And I was looking at like gross movement patterns and I and one of the things was everybody should learn a martial art whether striking or grappling. And I remember working on it and in that evening I'm looking at my phone and it's you on a podcast and I

[06:08] didn't know who you were but I was like it said something about natural movement and I was like oh what's this about? And I click it and I don't remember exactly the intro but it was something like have you ever seen an out ofshaped fish or an out of shape eagle? You said something like along those lines. And then I was like, pardon my French, but I was like, "Fuck, he's right. I've never seen an out of shape eagle or an out of shape fish." No. No. So then I was like, "All right." And I watched the podcast and then I got up. It was late at night. So it was like 11:30 at night. I got up. I walked to my computer. I went to move.com and the popup was if I gave you my email, you gave me all the pages of your book that didn't get published. Mhm. So I got that. Yeah. and then at night I'm like reading it and I came to a conclusion and that conclusion was what I was trying to achieve and what I was trying to do. You already did and you did it better than I was capable of doing at that time and I'm not one to reinvent the wheel. So I was like, "Oh, I just need to take this course." I walked right back into her room. I looked at my wife and I said, "I'm going to go do this certification."

[07:08] And it changed my life. I went I did it October 2020 and when I it was like the thing that clicked for me and the thing that made everything make sense. Now, my background is in academia, right? I have a masters in exercise physiology. I, you know, I've worked in everything from strength conditioning to a hospital to boutique high-end gyms. And this was the thing that just made sense and it was the thing that's the most logical. It's the most effective. It's the most efficient method. And now I use it with everybody. I use it with my seven-year-old clients. I use it with my Olympic judokas. I use it with my professional MMA fighters. And it altered not only my philosophy of training for my clients or for myself, but it also put like a whole different layer into my understanding because now I understand physiology at a deeper level. I understand neurology at a deeper level because you can connect it to natural movement in such a high end. What do you mean at deeper level? Because as an exercise scientist, it's not like you did not understand. But maybe what you want to say is like from a a um conceptual standpoint, you had

[08:11] you had the science, you had the knowledge, but then it would become more experiential. Yes. But it's what do I mean by deeper level? Let's let's use a concept like lactate. Lactate and exercise fizz when you're in school, it depending on what year you came up, it was a waste product. Mhm. It was a waste product. But then if you look at Brooks's research, you look at the lactate shuttle, it's every muscle fiber, the skin produces it, the eyes produce it, every organ kind of produces its own lactate source. It utilizes it, it shuttles it, and it's one of the only things that can cross the bloodb brain barrier. Now, that's usually where it end, right? You study exercise fizz and you're like, "Oh, cool. It crosses the bloodb brain barrier." Yeah. But because I was doing movement, I wanted to know what's the next step. I like to ask why like four to six times. So okay, why does it go into the brain? Well, it seems to be the preferred fuel source for axon. Okay, why? Right? And then you you keep going down the line and at some point you arrive to a point and this the cool

[09:11] thing about this it's not substantiated. It's not a substantiated theory. It's something that you have to come to the conclusion to that everything is leaning in this direction. And in in a month, in six months, and eight months, I imagine it'll come out and say, "Oh lactate is the precursor to your happiness." And movement creates happiness. Not just any movement. Not the gym. Not the gym, cuz you're in isolation. You're not using it. You're not using movement as it's intended to to solve problems. lifting a a dumbbell and doing a bicep curl is not the same as lapping something, carrying it, putting it to from point A to point B or being outside trying to get from point A to point B and having to get there in a specific way, solving problem. It it's a lot more impactful, you know, like brainwise, neurologically wise, physiologically, but that's just one little segment. This is applied to everything I know about physiology and it's way bigger than No, it's true. It is it is known that brain derived neurotropic factors are basically they they reid rejuvenate the brain we need

[10:12] that and exercise triggers that reduction. However, not any exercise is equal. So if the exercise is mindless, it's just physical activity. And by the way, when I say just physical activity, I don't mean it in any any bad way. Yeah. Yeah. Additional physical activity is wonderful. However, when it becomes adaptable means your brain really has to engage in the here and now of the movement situation, context, the variables. You need to operate your body to be effective. You can't can't be mindless. Then the production of brain derived neurotropic factor goes up. Yeah, it's bigger. I I I look at it like this. I honestly don't care what anybody does to become more capable. But I feel like if you really wanted to do it the best way, you go through natural movement. You do, right? That's all I say. I don't care if you're bodybuilding. I don't care if you're Olympic weightlifting. I don't care if you're doing CrossFit. I don't care if you're doing high rocks. As long as you're doing something to better yourself. But eventually, everybody comes to the same conclusion. Oh,

[11:13] natural movement just makes the most sense. Yeah. Because I went through that in my life, too. I did bodybuilding, didn't did functional strength and conditioning. I went and got certified with Olympic weightlifting. You know, I tried CrossFit. I did all these things. And when I did move down, I was like, "That's it. This makes the most sense." And it's self-regulating, right? A balance skill versus a bold skill versus a junk. But I have a simple way to to u to boil that down into one liner, which is that it is none of those disciplines, sports, protocols, program enable natural movement. It's the other way around. Natural movement is what make any sports, any physical activity, any traditional physical discipline possible. So you look at soccer, you're running and you're kicking a ball. Okay? You look at um tennis or ping pong, what are you doing? You're moving on your feet and then it's a basically a throwing pattern that's also a catching and a throwing pattern at once through a

[12:14] device. That's a racket. Yeah. All that is possible because our ancestors evolved with these abilities to move on their feet and throw or catch things. That's natural movement. We made them specialized sports, but originally it was the full scope of movements that you needed to survive. Yeah. Yeah. No, 100%. I I look at like what's funny is like when you look at like typical fitness instruction, everybody's like the most important thing you can develop is strength or the most important thing is size. And they all have their different opinions, but they forget that that's all a result of doing. Y you don't get strength in isolation. I don't just sit here and manifest strength. I have to physically go do something to do it. No, no, no. It just doesn't work that way. But yeah, I mean, we can continue to talk about that for hours. And by the way, in this era of AI, we still deal with the reality of the earth and the weather, and it looks like it could rain on us. Yeah. So, we got to get moving. Let's get to the So, so when I met you in December, um I know uh you were looking at Movenet and and trying to

[13:15] evolve it and there was I I don't want to call it a level of frustration, but definitely a point of like you were like, I can't keep trying to do this by myself. I have too many things on my plate. And when we had our conversation and dinner, uh you know, I gave you my full unadulterated opinion of what I felt moved was for me and where I felt like it was at at that current point. and and you mentioned to me like, hey, I'm looking to continue to evolve it, but I can't continue to do it by myself. And we had some really deep conversations on those days and then at some point uh I remember you reached back out to me in January and you said, "I need to hire a director. Would you be interested in applying for it?" You asked me for my resume and I think we were on a call like once a week, once every two weeks for like 3 months. Yes. And then March 31st, you offered me this position. Yes. So why? I'm glad you accept it to begin with. Why? Um, look, you have the passion, you have the integrity, you have the insight, you have the

[14:17] experience. What else could I expect that would be better than that? You have the uh the physicality, you have the experience not only in move, you you you are level three certified but also in many um movement sports modalities. So you're really really knowledgeable in all of that. So what else could I expect from a a performance director um than this kind of of resume is absolutely phenomenal. So yes, of course you were to me uh you appear very quickly to be uh the ideal uh person. I'm glad you accepted that position. We're going to do great work together. No, I'm I'm glad that that you gave me the opportunity. Uh I honestly didn't have it on my radar until we had those discussions and you were like, "Dude, why don't we why don't we just why don't we explore it?" And as we continue to have conversations, you know, I've had I've had bosses in my career, but I've never had somebody like you who's given me the freedom, the

[15:19] reign, the insight, the direction, and the vision and has trusted me to be able to operate independently, but always with the, you know, remember I told you I always keep you in the loop and we're already moving in that direction that you asked me to move that 2.0, right? Move in that direction. We can't share everything with everybody right now because we have too many big things coming down the pipe. No. Yeah, I know. But like while like move 2.0, what exactly is going to be different? Can you tell a little about it? Can we reveal a bit? So, we won't only be a certification company. I think that's the safest thing to say. I think the biggest lapse in anything in health and fitness is there's not enough support for the certified professionals. And that comes across whether you get your certified personal trainer, whether you get a CrossFit certification, and even when you got to move that certification, there's just not enough there wasn't enough support to help somebody build themselves as an entrepreneur. And we had those conversations. And my insight was let's

[16:20] create an ecosystem, a hub that when somebody becomes certified through natural movement, not only do do their skill sets improve and not only their ability to teach others improves, but their ability to do business improves. Their ability to to look at projecting how their business is going to perform. how to coach individual movements correctly and even better or refining or optimizing their coaching skill. So I wanted I want to build a place of community where anybody who becomes certified in natural movement movement specifically they're going to take their skills to the next level okay through our organization institution and that's that's one piece that's one piece but it's a major piece already because that means the MoveNet Academy is going to be the most diverse and complete online toolbox if I may say and it's the whole curriculum. It's not just about how you teach the techniques. It's also um being a better entrepreneur, making your your

[17:22] career to to improve. Yeah. Um and um and all that to be online. So that's what you are already uh building very actively. Yeah. Yeah. Working on it. that we're going to be uh launching officially and it's going to be soon available also through a revamped website. So, faster website. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's coming up for sure. Yes. Yes. Um I I think the the reason why I look at that is cuz anybody who does what we do, you're literally trying to help somebody improve themselves in some way, shape, or shape or form. Yes, we are. And the the unfortunate reality is a lot of us would do it for free, but we forget that we live in a society that requires money to operate. I had that same sensation and feeling, but I was fortunate enough to have mentors in place that kind of guided me because you're not impacting your morality. You're not impacting your ethos. You're not impacting this. You're just gaining the ability to help more people. And that's what people lose sight of when

[18:23] they're like, "Oh, well, I don't want to sell my session for this much or I don't want to make this much kind of income. I just want to help people." And it's like, you're helping seven. You want to help 50 people or do you want to help seven? Do you want to help 200 people or do you want to help three? Yes. And that's that that's what I had to sh like shift my mind and and switch. It's complete different. I agree. Movet has traditionally attracted a lot of very very well-intentioned people. people with a heart, people who want to change the world, people want to help others. Traditionally, that's it's been really our our audience, which is wonderful. It's beautiful. However, um not that many of them were equipped with, let's say, equally practical um knowledge because the knowledge of teaching movement is a very practical knowledge. But the the knowledge of presenting yourself, your services, your your your classes uh to to the world is a very important practical knowledge. And without it, how are you going to find uh

[19:24] students to teach? Right. How are you going to help? Exactly. Exactly. So, we want to empower uh our certified trainers to also be uh more competent entrepreneurs if they don't have that kind of feedback. Sorry. of of background. Uh the Moenet University is going to provide that. So, this is pretty exciting. I I just I just want to cultivate an environment where we we build ourselves through physical activities. We do things that we we don't like and we become more skillful. You know, I I alluded to jiu-jitsu. The first time you get choked or you get put shoulder pressure in your face, you tap, right? As you grow in skill, you become more resilient. Somebody hits you with shoulder pressure and you're like, I'll eat it. Yeah, somebody goes to choke you, I'll eat it for a little bit. That has to be applied to every aspect of your life. Things that you're uncomfortable with, you only grow through discomfort. And when you can strip all that stuff off, you grow. So, I want to provide all the things that maybe a a move certified trainer doesn't

[20:24] feel competent in, I want to give them an opportunity to explore and be good at it. Yes. And also we have these wonderfully trained and highlevel expert level people who've gone to the movement system all of our TI's and they don't have enough opportunity to leverage their their skill set of teaching others. We're going to give them now an opportunity to to teach. So imagine not just the certification. Imagine taking a course from Diana on an alternative way to do the powerup right. Yes. That means that every TI will have an opportunity um to share some of their knowledge, some of their own let's say own signal, own teaching signature, little little things that make them unique at teaching move. And not only it's an opportunity for them to reach more people than the people that uh show up to a particular certification workshop, but it's going to be an opportunity for all the existing MCTs, Moodnat certified

[21:25] trainers, and all the also the candidates to have access to Diana, to Scott, to you, to me, uh to the whole team. Yeah. To the whole team. And and there's nothing like learning an insight from somebody who may do something a little different than you. Yes, that shapes. It's the detail. It's the detail that they use that when they share it to you, you go, "Oh, that makes all the difference in the world." It does, you know. So, there's there's a lot more things that are going to be coming down the pipe. I'm really excited for the opportunity and I'm glad that, you know, now I've been I've been working already for over a month behind the scenes and nobody's known my existence. It's true. So, it's it's fun to be like, "All right, I can now talk and share who I am." Yes. I'm I'm in fact it's the first uh first time that we are um that you are on camera on camera showing up to the to the Moenet community and um I'm so so happy about that. It's really a blessing and let's say let's call it um episode one of Moven 2.0. So, we're

[22:27] basically not sharing much if we've shared a lot, but not like people are intrigued now. But it's episode one. There's going to be an episode 2. Episode one. Hey, you know what? Move 2.0 is coming. What? What is it? Sh. We'll share more next time. Wait for episode two. No, they they can already see like we we already sent out the communication to the MCTs. Like, true. Our move trainer map was down for a while. We've got a new solution for that. That's getting fixed. that's getting repaired. New websites coming real soon. Move Pro Academy is coming soon. Yeah. New courses on Thinkific are coming soon. There's a lot of things that are coming down the pipe that I think people are going to be like, "Oh, this is what we've needed when when we so that already I think it's a pretty exciting announcement, but when in future episodes we'll the real the real big one." Yeah. Big stuff. It's going to be like what? Yeah.

[23:28] Cuz nobody knows. Nobody knows. So, yeah. All right. All right. We're good. We're good. I think uh introducing myself to to the world and uh I look forward to interacting with you guys, meeting with you guys, and and moving this to the next. Ladies and gentlemen, Brian Bitan Court, our new performance director at MoveNet. Congratulations. Thank you. Appreciate it. All right.
