TITLE: The Turkish Get-Up Explained | Movement, Constraints, and the Real Purpose of Training
VIDEO ID: ljw0HURuuLM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ljw0HURuuLM
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-05-06
DURATION: 37:14
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:03] All right guys, this is Brian from MovNat. I'm the director of performance and curriculum and I thought today we'd do something a little bit fun and a little bit different. Oh, often when we work with clients or with students, we teach techniques or we teach a movement and we think that the tool that we use is the thing that's actually creating the adaptation when it should be the practice of movement and the technique. So, there are a couple of things that I want you to have at the forefront of your mind. The first thing is that when you work with a student or a client, always focus on the lowest level of competency. The second thing, what you're about to witness today is me working with individuals that I've never worked with before. We have Chris and Raquel. I know them, we do jiu-jitsu together, so I know they can move, but I've never actually worked with them. And today we're going to be teaching get-ups. So, from here on out, I'm going to be really focused on communicating with them, but at the same time I'm going to use this as an opportunity to teach some foundational principles and some ideas, okay? All right. All right guys, so what we're going to be working on is a get-up and you've probably seen this movement

[01:03] before. It's like what they do with a kettlebell, right? They call it the Turkish get-up. So, let me just demonstrate real quick. The idea is imagine if you had a kettlebell in your hand, you get to your elbow, from your elbow you get to your hand, you're keeping the kettlebell completely overhead the entire time and then two options you can windshield wipe, stand, come back down, windshield wipe, step, and then come back down into the bottom position, right? It's a lot of steps, but that's not what's important. What I want you guys to kind of understand like what we're trying to accomplish here is that all the movement that we do is movement is a behavior that's designed to solve a problem. So, fundamentally, laying down, the problem is I need to stand up. And there's a variety of ways we can do that, right? It doesn't have to be exactly how I just showed. But, we're going to learn it in that way for several reasons. One, to help explain to the audience that the tool does not dictate the technique. The tool assist in the learning of the technique. So, when I'm working with you

[02:04] guys, I'm going to find what your lowest level of competency is and then use a variety of tools, whether it's this sandbag or whether it's a kettlebell we have off camera, to kind of teach you the move. Right? Now, before that, I got to talk a little bit more to the audience. So, why are we going to be looking at the get-up is because the get-up teaches all the foundational principles of human movement, which are tension and relaxation. You have to know when to be tense and when to be relaxed. Two, how your points of support, so when I lay down, right? We can look at ourselves as one giant point of support or you can count all the individual pieces of support. The head, the shoulders, the hands, my butt, my feet, the back of my legs, or you could just look at it as one. But, it's how our points of support interact with the surface of support. And then we're going to use the get-up because it teaches you all of those positions, body weight shift, body weight transfer, and we diminish points of support until we get to a position that's less stable. Right? If I stand, from laying down to standing, you know, I'm getting less and less stable. Not unstable, but less and less stable, okay? So, first thing is

[03:06] when we're in this position for the get-up, the first thing that we're going to do is we're going to understand body weight shift. You're going to drive off of this bent leg to roll onto your side, okay? Really, your goal is to try and keep this knee facing up, but if it falls, it falls, it's okay. I mean, it's whatever strategy kind of works for you, but I want you to create tension in this hip or this glute, and then I just want you to rock to the side, right? The next step that we're going to see is body weight transfer. So, as I shift my body weight, I'm going to transfer my body weight onto my elbow. And then from there, I will transfer my body weight onto my hand. And then here, I'm going to create tension through this arm line and through this foot and through this structure to then be able to move my leg and change my position to this half and half open knee. And then from here I'm going to take away my hand. And then from here you have two options. You can windshield wipe this back leg or you can rotate this leg forward. And then from there we shift our body weight over our center of mass over our leg and

[04:08] we use that to stand. And then we're just going to reverse the entire process. What I'm going to do is I'm going to work with each of you one at a time. And then from there we're going to go ahead and get started. So Chris, let me borrow you first and let me get you to go ahead and lay down. And I'm going to do my best not to block the camera. All right, awesome. So you're going to lay down, we're going to take one leg. Let's make this leg straight and this one bent, exactly. Now all I want you to do is just shift your body weight and rock to the side. Excellent. So now we see here, right? You're not putting any tension in here, right? So come back. And I want you to think like you're driving out of this foot to extend through this hip. Little bit better. Think this. Like you're trying to push your hip forward. There you go. You see how much more you you roll, right? Now just play with how much you need. You need You don't need to dial it to 11, right? Boom. Now the other great thing I get to teach is the sequence and timing. So I want you to kind of figure out while you're rocking how to get yourself to your form. So roll to the side, get yourself to your form. Excellent, beautiful. So what am I looking for as a coach is I want to see this this leg have to get up. Does this leg have to move? Because go back one

[05:08] step. Let's say this was a struggle for him. Try and get to your elbow but lift this leg up. You might see that sometimes that that leg kind of comes up and that's them trying to create tension in this abdominal region to get to the elbow. But don't lift this leg, you did a great job. So now let's get to your elbow. Now from there get to your hand. Good. Now I just want you to point your hand away a little bit. There you go, right there. Now I want you to create tension through here. So don't not forward, just think like you're trying to drive down and pick yourself up a little bit, right? So now let's just pick ourselves up and sit back down. Pick ourselves up and sit back down. And one more time. Good. And now think of like a technical stand up. Right? So exactly. But instead of standing, let's get to let's replace your hip with the knee. Exactly, right? So that's an option right there. Now you're going to hip hinge from there. You're just going to come up like remove your hand and get up right. Exactly. And now from there you can adjust your feet as needed. Load your back toe. Shift your weight over your lead leg and then try and stand up. But instead of there, go back one step. So think like you're coming towards me. There you go. That's it. And now we're going to go backwards. You can find the floor. You can go ahead

[06:09] and bring the leg through and then lay back down, right? So all of those things were Where's his See, that that's an example, right? You saw when you got up that leg had to come up, right? So one one thing. So let's go back there. Let's go ahead and and sit up. So how your legs Yeah, exactly, right? Your legs want to come up. So now if that is a struggle, that that's not a negative thing. Let's pick up one of the legs and I want you to kick that leg down as you go to stand up. Right? So you use the momentum and then try using the other leg as well, right? Yeah. So there's different like techniques that you can use. You can use like momentum. You can use the swinging of a leg to kind of create that that body weight shift and that body weight transfer. And then little by little you start to take that away. Cuz really the goal that I want you to have is you connecting those dots. Where am I tense? Where am I relaxed? What's actually happening? And then from there we can use a variety of tools. He didn't really have a problem getting to the elbow, but I'll be right back. So this is the piece of equipment that you know, the moment you put this to this exact same movement, it becomes a

[07:10] Turkish get-up. So what we're going to do is lay flat on your back. You're going to grab this kettlebell. You're going to keep it straight up. Keep this leg bent. Now all I want you to think of is driving this kettlebell to the ceiling. Yeah. So really what this is acting as is a tool, a constraint that's forcing him to optimize what's happening here. Come back down. And let's do that again. Just drive that kettlebell to the ceiling. Right? And then we can take that away. Put your hand, relax your hand, and let's repeat the same process. So now think like you were doing that. Right? And now do it without your hand up. Same same idea. Exactly, right? You see how smoother it is, right? So, really what I want you guys to understand is yes, it's a Turkish get-up, but really what it is it's a it's a constraints-led approach to learning. There's a variety of ways to get up. We're picking this way of getting up. This template in itself is a constraint. It's step-by-step. I'm teaching it step-by-step. That's called scaffolding, right? Because there's no decision-making behind any of this. I'm breaking it down step-by-step-by-step, and then we added the kettlebell. Now,

[08:11] you're going to say, "Oh, but that adds intensity and that adds complexity." And it's true, it does add intensity and complexity, but adding intensity and complexity is just giving your body feedback to solve a problem. For instance, this movement me trying to get up from the floor from here, it's kind of difficult. I mean, I can make it happen, but let's add some intensity, and what happens? I can get up very easily. So, it is more intense, but it's also a tool to help me accomplish a task. In that case, it acts as a counter-balance. So, Chris, that's essentially the get-up. That looks pretty good. Let me borrow Raquel, and let me take you through the get-up. So, you're going to go ahead and lie flat on your back. You're going to have one leg extended. We're going to bend one leg. And I want you to drive out of this leg and rock yourself to your side. Good, and then come back. Again, one more time. Good. And I want you to find tension in this butt cheek as you go. So, think like if you were pushing your foot into your ground. Like, pick up your hip, this hip. That, right? You feel that tension in that glute? So, do that as you roll. Exactly, but now don't think about

[09:11] picking it up, just think about rolling you to your side. Good. Pick up pick yourself up less. Nice. Okay, now can you get to your elbow? So, there, right? We see the leg kind of come up. So, come back down. And then come up again. And that wants to come back up, right? So, here's some things you could do as a coach. Come back. So, what I want you to do is take my hand. I'm going to help guide you a little bit, and I want you to try and find ah, that tension. That's perfect. Again, go ahead. Nice. Another way, if you're not available, you're going to take this leg up up up up up and kick it down as you go. Go, kick it down and go. Boom, but keep this one down at the same time. So, take it up, kick it up. Boom, and then shift your weight, right? So, that's an example of body weight shift, body weight transfer, the use of momentum. These aren't negative things. These are just things in the step of the process of teaching the actual movement. So, now I want you to go ahead and um get to the elbow. Beautiful. Let's come back. Let's use the momentum so it's smoother. So, kick your leg, make it make it really not like yeah. There you go, good. Now, get to your hand.

[10:12] Good. Point your hand away. And now, without anything else, all I want you to do is pick up the hip. So, drive your hip up and come back down. Drive your hip up and come back down. And drive your hip up and come back down. Good. And now, we're going to try and do like that technical standup or place that hip with this knee. Beautiful. Now, come up like your upright posture. Good. Now, let's do something different. Let's close off this leg. And now, we're going to shift our weight over this leg and then stand up, yeah. Good. And now, just reverse it. So, go ahead and reverse. Whoa, you see how you broke some steps there? So, let's just come up one step. Now, let's open this leg. Like bring open open like bring the whole leg, swing it out, yeah. And now, let's find the floor. And now, let's kick the leg all the way through. All the way through. We're going to go to sitting. We're going to just going to get back to laying down. So, kick the leg all the way through. Beautiful. Yeah, and then you just get back to your elbow and then you lay back down, right? So, we're just going up to reverse. So, uh-huh. Get to your hand. Good. Come back up. Beautiful. Yep, and then shift and then come back.

[11:14] Open the leg. So, let's come back one more step, right? That There's nothing wrong with that, but exactly. And now, we come back down and then we kick the leg through and then we come back. Beautiful. All right, let me take the stage there a little bit from you. So, one other thing that I like about get-ups, and there we we saw some examples of like, you know, getting through the movement a little bit faster than you need to, but is that it fundamentally teaches a lot of the positions that we see in other movements. For instance, a hip hinge, right? So, if I get to here, elbow roll up, hand post, we're going to do the half tripod transition. This position here is a hip hinge. It's a variation on a hip hinge. So, it's actually teaching somebody essentially how to deadlift without ever deadlifting, but it's transferable. Then from here, when we have to move our leg around, we're teaching single leg stance. I've made this position just a a big foot, right? It's essentially this idea except from here. So, now we have single leg stance, and then from there again the body weight shift to go ahead and stand up. Now,

[12:14] when you look at you know, the the the majority of the fitness industry, we talk about how oh, well, you know, you have one camp of people that are like, oh, this movement isn't useful. It's not going to make you any stronger. It's not going to make you uh it's not going to build muscle. It's not going to do any of those things, but I don't necessarily agree with any of that because you can load it, right? Just like anything. And not just with a kettlebell like we just did earlier, but we can load it with a sandbag. So, I brought here a nice little 100-lb sandbag, and I'll go ahead and demonstrate it first. So, I'm going to get the sandbag on top of me. And then once I get the sandbag on top of me, I'm going to go ahead and try and stand up with it. And then from here, you know, you can either scrape or just grab it. And then come back. And when we talk about practicality of movement, this happens all the time

[13:15] anytime you grapple. So, if anybody's ever grappled and has been put inside of control or has seen Craig Jones do octopus guard, that's exactly what happens. So, Chris, you're going to be the last person. We're going to figure out how to do this position. And I'm actually going to walk you through like how to make it as efficient like right off the bat, okay? So, the the big challenge is getting the sandbag on you, right? So, think like a reverse shrimp and just pull it to you. Beautiful, right? You understood that fundamentally. Now, the next thing is I want you to load this part of your hip. So, push that back down into that crease, right? Yeah, right there. So, now make sure your hand goes over the bag. Now, when you rock to your side, I want you to try and think like you're keeping the bag as vertical to the roof as possible, so it's going to be side loaded onto your hip. So, get to your elbow. And now get get up get up get to your hand get to your hand. Good. Try and get your knee a little bit stacked, good. Now, let's get to your other knee. Yep, yep, yep. Yes. Now, come up aha, then rock it over to the side. And now from there you got to stand up,

[14:16] so load your back foot. There you go, up and then come back. Boom, and then open it up. Open this leg like watch. There you go, now you can find the floor and hinge. Instead of falling back, you would have fell forward, but it's okay. Go ahead and lay back. We don't want to reverse it from there anyway. And now go ahead and drop the bag, right? You can go ahead. So, look, that was a really big increase in complexity and intensity, but for you, Chris, did that feel like something you have to do all the time? It didn't feel too terrible, right? You've never done a 100-lb Well, you did it once when I was teaching in Miami circuit you attempted it, but that was a lot smoother now that you knew how to put the Yeah, fundamentally. Yeah, it makes sense. But, what I was saying is, you know, as you Turn the bag this way. As we load it, I'm always trying to make sure that I'm loading my skeleton versus my tissue, right? So, another reason why this is such a great teaching tool is because it's teaching you how to make a movement efficient and how to optimize you against the constraint or the object, right? So, that's really what I'm trying to get to. Now, from here

[15:17] it's very difficult to get to the elbow, but the The point is when this happens, that's how I'm getting to the upright. I'm using this drive from this foot and this connection of my elbow and this foot to get to this position. Then from here, I'm just posting to the hand and now it's that big bridge and get to my foot versus rolling onto my leg, right? So, one thing you did was roll forward, which is not a bad thing. It puts you in kind of the slow stance. There are two ways to achieve the same end goal, which is get to this open you. Now, I can windshield wipe and step or I can lift and turn. But, the point is now from here I can stand up, right? So, I just stand and then come back down. Now, there's no rush here. I can open up, find the floor, kick through, get to my elbow, get to my side, and then follow the floor, right? So, you're trying to be as like patient and slow as it. But, the point isn't that this is strength get up. The point is just to explain

[16:18] that all of these constraints have value, right? So, for you guys who have probably exercised before, how did you traditionally look at movement before? Just like exercise or did you ever think about it as purposeful? I used to look at it as exercise, but now I look at it as as a purpose. Does this make sense? Just do the move, right? And it's kind of mindless, but now here you can see an example of doing the move, connecting why you do the move, right? That's really the most important thing. So, is that the only way to get up? Absolutely not. But, we teach that get up as one example because you can teach so many concepts. How to shift your body weight. How to transfer your body weight. the relationship between your points of support and the surface of support. How to create tension. Where to be relaxed. And stand up. And you guys are you guys move well. I I've worked with so many clients that can't even make it past this part on day one. You know, they're like this. You know, it's it turns into So, you just teach them this. And eventually from there you teach him this.

[17:19] And then from there you teach him this. And then you build it step by step. But as a practitioner as a practitioner, you should be aiming where your client's lowest level of competency is. And then the next two things are using these tools and constraints as teaching tools, not as the end objective. Like, I could care less if they Turkish get up 50 lb overhead or 60 lb overhead. What I care is can they get up off the floor? >> the difference night and day. It's just the same thing with um with the grappling. That sometimes you're grappling with somebody that's a lot lighter than you and they're very small. You know, they're physical, but they feel super heavy, but it's knowing how to optimize the weight and its distribution when you're going with them. So, for this example here, when I have that sandbag on top of me that people won't understand that are watching cuz they're not feeling it unless they redo it themselves. I can barely breathe when that thing's on my chest because it's compressing my lungs and I also feel I'm on I'm unbalanced. I'm here. I'm using everything from my bottom body to try to come up because I have the weight on top of me here. The moment I loaded it onto my hips, it's completely is different. It's like, okay, there's like a balance beam here. I can just come up. It's like 100 lb turning

[18:21] into 40. But 2 in up, it's 170 lb even though it's 100. But 2 in down, 30 lb. I can just move. And that's amazing because it was a night and day difference, which I did not expect that at all. I was like, okay, this is heavy. Like, I'm going to struggle moving. No, put on your hips. Load on your hips. Okay, I'm not struggling anymore. I can I can jump from here if I wanted to. Beautiful. Night and day difference. Like that's insane. Yeah, I'm glad that was something we could move into. Yeah, the idea is to have to optimize your own connection to the thing, right? So, if I if I don't leverage that, then I can't leverage the the constraint of the tool or whatever is on top of it. So, I'm glad that was like a night and day thing for you. Same thing when you were rocking the leg. Again, you know, not to refer to grappling, but it's something we do on our off time. When someone's on your side and you want to flip them over, okay, this could be hard. But the moment you use your leg for momentum is not as hard anymore. And it's again to what you're showing here. You can't get up on the leg, rock the leg. It's It's beautiful. It's It works.

[19:24] Everything connects. Yes. The whole thing like so the thing you're you're discussing is what's called natural movement, right? And it's that this idea that all movement is manipulative, meaning I manipulate my environment or myself around the environment. So I pick up something everything from point A to point point B. Locomotive, I have to get from point A to point B. And the other part of human movement is that it's combat, right? Striking and grappling. And every get-up that you've ever seen in your life happens in grappling in some way or another. I mean you ever seen like a drop a drop fireman's carry? This drop fireman's carry is this configuration which say in fitness they call it the shin box. And they they use it as a stretch, right? They'll "Oh, this is a stretch." This is a way for me to get up off the floor. If I mounted you, this is what? S mount, right? This is me about to shoot a triangle. Right? So the the idea is not to separate these things away from what they fundamentally are designed to solve. This is equally as good as picking something up and really heavy from the ground as it is as just getting up as it is as keeping somebody on the ground as it is as forcing them to

[20:25] submit. And it's all the same application separated by that, separated by this, separated by where the person is, right? If I go and I grab you and I drop and I sink you down, you you got to fall on the floor. You got to fall to the ground, right? That's the That's the whole thing. That's that that's like the difference that I'm trying to make people understand is that we shouldn't be exercising. I mean you obviously know it's good for you and it's healthy for your bones, but we should be practicing movement and just learning as much as we can fundamentally so that we can become capable. And understand where these things overlap and all. I think that's like the fundamental issue. Like people look at get-ups, right? And they're like, "Oh, that's just like a a a circus show, right? That's just like a little act. It doesn't really have any But it's cuz we've we've divided movement and purpose. You're looking at it as an exercise, but again, you're not fundamentally understanding that yes, it helps me get up from point A to point B, but an example we looked at is like if you're in half guard and you shoot the underhook, this, right? That idea of this is grabbing the leg, and then that can get

[21:26] me to get on top of you or just leave the situation. Um so, the movement exists everywhere. Every get-up is a thing in in a grappling context. If you look at like the fireman's carry, right? They they end in this position, and they toss somebody, but it's also a get-up. It's called the side bend Right? So, there's like all these kind of positions. Look, side bend sit. What does it look like? S-mount, right? S-mount, right? Boom. Right? You're trying to see it. So, all of this stuff kind of contextually So, at MoveNat, right? The idea is that all movement has has a purpose, but they're all kind of in domains. So, movement is meant to be manipulative. I can pick up, move it from point A to point B, combative, right? Striking, grappling. But, when you just from those two Locomotion is the other domain, right? You're meant to go from point A to point B. You don't necessarily have to pick anything up. And there's another one, expressive. I can move just because I want to. But, the idea is that every movement, like the get-up patterns, they all are in the combative side, but they don't necessarily have to be in a combative context. I could just get up

[22:28] from the floor if I have to. That's it. Punto y plano. Or I can use it in a grappling context, like this example. When you drop on somebody and you do the fireman's carry, that's the position you're in. So, the idea for us is giving you as much exposure as you can have, so that when you run into these situations, you can perform them, right? The idea is capability. Right? Movement is meant to be effective and efficient, but the idea is are you capable? Not are you in shape? Can you use the techniques that you know, string them together to solve the problem before you? You've probably seen this movement, you know, on the internet. Yes. Right? The Turkish get up. Okay. And we should be looking at the bell. And, you know, this is viewed as a great exercise for developing shoulder stability and strength and yada yada yada. And you have, you know, uh like in anything in life, you have two groups of people that either agree or disagree with it, right? You have people who say this is optimal for shoulder stability and it'll get you strong. And then there's other people who are like, "You can't load that enough to get strong."

[23:28] Right? They're like, "You can't lift a big enough weight for it to matter." And the argument I have for that is A, strength is relative to the individual. If you lift 20 lbs today, but you can lift 25 lbs tomorrow, then you are stronger than you were the other day, right? Now, again, strength is relative. You might have some people who are like, "Well, you're only strong if you lift 1.5 times your body weight, and you can only really do that with compound lifts." But I think there was like a a record where some guy did like a 100 lb or like 100-plus lb Turkish get up with like a barbell. So, it's like pretty wild. But that's not the point. The point is I want you to understand that any tool you use, and any load you use, although it's an an increase in the intensity of the movement or an increase in the complexity of the movement, what it really is, it's a constraint used to teach you that technique. So, if movement is a behavior designed to solve a task, and that you were laying down, and you need to stand up, you would perform what's called a get up. And there's a myriad of ways you can get up, right? We're going to talk about this one that I just showed you now, the Turkish get up, without the Turkish part. Right? So, we're going to do the get up first. And

[24:30] then I'm going to give you a couple of constraints to teach it to you a little bit more effectively and see if you can connect those dots. So, let me get you to go ahead and lay flat on your back over here. I want you to go ahead and bend this one leg. Let's make this arm long. Yeah, and we're going to place it right here in front of you and palm down, like that. All right? Other hand out of the way. You can have it here, you can have it on And leg as long as out of the way. Now, what I want you to think of is this leg, this foot, as being the thing that's going to rock you to your side. So, use this so that you roll onto that arm essentially, your left arm. Yep, but keep your foot planted to the ground. So, come back. So, drive out of the floor and roll to your side. Yes, and then come back. Good, and roll to your side. Good, come back. Nice. And now, can you do the same thing but keep the knee pointing up the entire time? Yes, and relax. And your head, you don't have to turn it. You can lift your your head up and be as comfortable as you want with your head. Let's do that one more time.

[25:30] Good. And I want you to do the same thing, but I want you to get to this forearm. Right? So, this elbow. To the forearm? Yeah, to the forearm. But like pick yourself up onto your forearm. So, like your shoulder's no longer touching the floor. Exactly, right? So, that's it. That's called an elbow roll up, right? So, if you were to look at me, all I'm doing is this. Almost like a sit-up. And just posting myself onto my elbow. Okay? So, let's get to that position again. Beautiful, come back. And one more time. Right? So, you can see like this leg is coming up, right? So, you're creating tension here that you don't really need to have tension here. So, let's do two things. Let's turn your back. Let's go ahead and lift this leg up, and I want you to kick this leg down and use the momentum to pick yourself up, right? So, kick the leg. Right. So, now you saw how easy you got up, right? So, now I want you to dial the gauge. How much do you actually need, right? So, you don't need a lot to get up there. So, go ahead pick up the leg again. Good, that's beautiful. And then when you do that, I want you to create tension here. Right? So, make that tense as you go. So, go ahead.

[26:31] Beautiful, and then relax this as much as you can. Let's go one more time. Good. Nice. Now, let's try it again, but don't rock the leg. Can you connect the dots on where you create a tension? And try not to move this leg up so much. Oh, kind of tough, right? It's hard for you, right? To to kind of keep that leg kind of tense. So, let's try another way. Let's go ahead and lay flat on your back and now let's go ahead and take my hand to keep this leg bent and now I'm going to guide you and I want you to start connecting as much tension as you need to get to your forearm, right? Let's try it again. So, we're coming up. Good and come back. Nice and then come back up. Good and then come back. And then last one. Good and come back. And now here's another little constraint we could do. I want you to hold this kettlebell in your hand. I want you to extend it all the way Yeah, yeah, hold it. Extend it all the way up and what I want you to think Look at the kettlebell the entire time and what I want you to think is like you're trying to get the kettlebell to touch the roof as you get to your elbow. So, go ahead. So, push that kettlebell. Good. Nice. Come back. And let's do it again. Good and then let's come back.

[27:32] And one more time. Right? So, you're driving it up to the sky. Cool. And now let's take that away. And now come back. Lay flat. And now let's get back to that elbow one more time with nothing. Good. All right, cool. Now let's just get to your hand. So, same thing and now extend your hand when you get there. So, get there. Get ex- Exactly. Beautiful. Now bring your hand just a hair in a little bit. Cool. And every time we come up I want you to play with where that hand is, right? So, that's a concept called differential learning. Every time you do it, you do it a little bit different so you get a little bit more exposure, okay? Next thing I want you to do is just bridge. So, you're going to pick up your hip. I'm here right here with you. You're going to pick up your hip and then come back down. Yep and then come back down. Let's bring this foot a little bit out so you have more space. And go ahead. Nice and then come back down and then one more time. Beautiful. And now we're just going to let's start it in reverse. So, let's stand up real quick. So, now we're here. We're standing up. You can just start start here right next to me. So, we're standing up. So, now what I want you to think of is we're going to do a reverse lunge, right? Easy peasy. We're going to do a reverse lunge. I got to remember what side were you on? Left

[28:34] side, okay. So, we're going to go ahead and step back with our left leg. Good and then we're going to open up our right leg. Cool. And now bring it back. Open it. Bring it back. Open it. Bring it back. Last time. Easy, right? So, remember when we were sitting down with our hand on the floor and our leg was long? That's what we're going to get to. Exactly. Now, reverse it. Good. And then come back again. Good. And then again. Good. And one more time. Good. And then go ahead. Nice. Then go ahead and stand up. Good. And now reverse the whole thing. Let's get back to laying down. Open up your lead leg. Find the floor. Kick through. Be careful behind you with the kettlebell and the sandbag, but go ahead and lay down. Flatten your back. Right? Cool. So, that's the get-up. Right? That is literally just the get-up pattern. So, now for you watching at home, all we did was scaffold the technique. We tried to use some implements to teach him to

[29:35] kind of relax this leg. We weren't super successful this time around, but with time and exposure it'll get a little bit better. And then the second thing to really understand is you look at movement in two ways. Effectiveness and efficiency. Effective is could he complete the task? Could he get from point A to point B? He did the thing, right? The object was to get up. He got up. He was effective. Now, I just work on getting it more efficient as I kind of continue to move forward with it, right? So, you want to try some more intense versions of that cuz that felt pretty easy, right? Okay. So, let me go ahead and lay down and show you a circus trick. So, you can get on that side real quick, sir. So, this is a 100-lb sandbag. Now, if we were working together, I wouldn't give you this just for fun, right? I would build you up to this, but seeing as we're just having a little bit of fun, I thought it would be cool for you to just try it. Uh you do do jujitsu. You do pick up people that are much heavier than this sandbag, but you're going to see that this looks really, really familiar to like octopus guard that we went over the other day. So, uh you're going to reverse shrimp, put the bag on top of you, and then from there we're going to do the exact same combination of movements that we did to go ahead and

[30:36] stand up. So, I have the bag. I'm literally going to I'll start laying on my side and I'll go ahead and reverse shrimp into the bag. And now from here, I'm just going to go ahead and get to my elbow, get to my hand, get to my knee, and then from here I'm going to go ahead load it, grab the bag however. I mean, if I need to make make the bag smaller so that I can get my hands around it, I can do. Create some tension, get the bag open, find the floor, kick through, get to my elbow and bring the bag down. All right? So, give it a shot. This is a good uh test of your reverse shrimp. Nice. Don't take it too far, right? You see how you you you it's it's going to be real difficult to lift. Let's see if you can figure it out. And then I'll walk you through some little techniques. Nice, nice, nice. Nice, nice, nice. It's okay? And then go

[31:37] ahead and get it up. Get it up. Good. All right, let's go back. So, that's an example of effectiveness. Go ahead. Woo! All right, so now let's make it easier. So, when you get it onto you, I want you to think like you're loading this hip bone. Okay. So, let's start Let's get it back on top of you. All right. Mhm. And I'll get it on top. Boom. Now, let it fall. So, now we're loaded on top of that hip. Now, get your hand on top. Now, when you rock to your side, stay keep this as vertical as you can. So, this should always be facing the roof and it should be loaded on your hip as much. So, go ahead exactly. You see how you're making it go away from you? Beautiful. Get to your elbow and do the same thing. Nice. Now, you're keeping it in this pocket. Beautiful. Now, let's get to the Let's replace this hip with this knee, right? Yep. And then stop right there. Oh, look at that. Easy. So, now it's loaded. Now, it's nothing crazy. Keep it here. And because it's loaded, all you're going to do is lift your leg and put it in front of you. This side? Yeah, just move it in front of you. Look, it's not going to be

[32:37] easy, right? Now, load your back foot. Like put your toes on the ground? Okay, good. Good. That's fine. And now reverse lunge. Nice. Now, open. Find the floor. Kick through. Good. And then just drop it off. Nice. And that's it. Way easier, right? Once you get the the the weight distribution. the technique. But it's the same It's like when we did um octopus. So, for those of you who don't know, let's go ahead and get in a side Like side control. Side control. Yeah. So, we're like here. It's this idea here. Right? When you're here in this kind of like dog fight situation. Like we went over it and then you know, you pick up the person and you dump them. It's that same idea that you see like Craig do that whole thing. Except it's with the the sandbag, right? So, you could do it from half. You could do it from any of those positions, but it's the same thing. >> the difference when you go down your hips than somewhere else. Yeah. It's like the weight is distributed. Yeah, cuz that principle is like universal, right? It's not this idea of tension relaxation, but it's the idea of your

[33:38] surface your your points of support against the surfaces of support and whatever the object is. Right? So, it's like a when you get You ever been like cross face or like shoulder to the face? Right? If you're what I call the double or shoulder, you're you're going to get smashed. But if I'm on my side and you're trying to smash me, right? If I'm like this and you're trying to smash me, nothing's going to really happen to me because you're you're trying to load through here and I'm flying. It's when I'm here and I'm eating a cross face that it's a whole different kind of ball game. And what's beauty about all of these kind of like get up patterns and interacting with any of these tools is you start to kind of learn how to manipulate your body against something that's transferable everywhere you go. Right? And that's really what I'm trying to get people to understand that we've somehow we've mixed exercise and the practice of movement as if they're two things together and they're not. Exercise is the mindless repetition of something. Right? How often do you go and you deadlift and you think, "I got to create

[34:39] the optimal tension between my hand and the barbell, my feet on the floor, and my hamstrings and my glutes?" Probably not often. You're probably just picking the thing up and just moving on with your life versus understanding fundamentally, "Where do I need to have tension? Where do I need to have relaxation? How is my body interacting with the thing that I'm working on?" When you practice movement, it's with the intent that you're trying to learn to become more effective and efficient in the position. So, all of any of these tools are are the constraints to teach you the actual movement, right? And, you know, yes, it's an increase in intensity. Right? This is heavier than nothing. Right? Body weight versus this, but it's also a tool that gives you something to solve against, which optimizes your ability to solve the problem because now you've acquired you I mean you you have encountered something that you have to overcome. Um I was using this example earlier, but like, you know, if I needed to do a a squat get-up. So, from here, just literally squat and stand up. So, literally here and stand up. I can do it, right? It's a lot of effort. But if I increase the intensity, this is

[35:39] technically heavier, but it acts as a counterweight. So, it makes everything easier. So, it's like this really weird kind of concept that we've forgotten in the sadly in the fitness industry is like we look at these things as if they're separate when they should be a collective thought. Like, yes, I'm increasing intensity. Yes, I'm increasing the com- complexity, but that's not necessarily a bad thing if you understand the application. If I'm trying to teach you something, I just have to give you the right constraint and the right intensity, and you're going to get better at it. This was a 100-lb sandbag. Like, that wasn't the end of the world for you. If I gave you a 250-lb sandbag or 200-lb sand- 200-lb sandbag, that might have been like, "Brian, what the hell are you trying to make me do?" But from the second rep, right? You understood load the hip. Super different from the first one. >> >> Yeah, keep it. Yeah, it wasn't it wasn't a struggle bus. So, really that was my intent and that was my intent to the audience is to show you that when we're teaching movement, I don't want you to look at the tools being the thing that creates the adaptation. I want you to think of what is the movement that what's the problem you're trying to solve and then using a variety of constraints. Right

[36:39] now I just use the kettlebell and sandbag, but I can use my hands. I can use a leg swing, right? If If somebody was struggling with this part here, you know, get them to understand that, right? To make it a little bit easier for the body weight shift and transfer. And just you know, there's so many different ways to skin a cat as they say, but um that was really the the lesson that I was trying to portray for the audience that we work with is that the use of constraints and the technique, but the technique is infinitely more important. Use the tool not as what's going to create the adaptation, but what's going to help teach somebody.
