TITLE: She Coaches 16 People at Once and Nobody Gets Left Behind
VIDEO ID: RadG02NFKU0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RadG02NFKU0
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-05-26
DURATION: 24:58
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] The reason why I wanted to have this call is that I think you're just such a valuable resource for the entire MovNat community, especially with everything you've done at the facility that you have there. And we had a question arise in the community in the Discord that was essentially like they own a CrossFit gym, and they're they're nestled inside of like the CrossFit arena and the Hyrox arena, and they have their level one and two MovNat certification. And one of the problems they had was delivering it at scale. Right? They were like, CrossFit when they first started their affiliations and stuff would provide them, you know, the a lot of the day. And we kind of had a back-and-forth conversation. It was good conversation where you know, my my issue with that is it's this blanket prescription for a group of people, and sometimes the modifications aren't there, and there's like my vision of CrossFit is always like this blanket prescription that doesn't inherently make a lot of sense, at least in my mind. So, I thought, who's the perfect person to possibly provide some resource and some context on how they've delivered on

[01:00] their end working with vast difference populations. So, for those of you who don't know, this is Elaine Hung. She owns a Break Free, right? In Malaysia. And she's actually running a certification in Kuala Lumpur, level one and a level two later this year. So, Elaine, talk to us. Like, how did how do you make it work at your facility? What was the first step? What what do you just riff with me. >> This is really This is like almost like, you know, a code that we've been trying to crack for so many years, you know? Um when we first running uh started running classes, MovNat classes, it was in the CrossFit facility. So, we were like borrowing uh the space in the CrossFit gym to start running our MovNat class. And to be honest, the uptake was actually pretty low from the CrossFitter's themselves. We tried reaching out to them and positioning it as a mobility kind of stuff, kind of work to assist to support the CrossFit

[02:01] movement. They did come along for a few sessions, but when they recognized that they actually cannot squat as the grass or like sit and squat or like do the various movement we do on the ground, when they find that they can't do it because they lack the mobility or the range to do it, and then they very quickly just fade away and went back to what they are used to, you know? We did that for like a whole year, and then we found that the people that we actually attracted were non-CrossFitters. So, it was a bit difficult for us actually to break cuz in their mind, the mindset is different, right? CrossFit mindset is like, you know, lifting as heavy as you can and you know, >> yourself. Yeah, pushing yourself till you break or pushing yourself until you collapse, you know? >> Correct. Correct. They're used to that kind of feeling, adrenaline rush, and then the kind of feeling of death is what we call it. So, I used to do CrossFit, so I know that what that feels like. But yeah, so slowing down is a bit difficult for them. So, we try and inject some some kind of like play kind

[03:03] of stuff. They would come along for a bit, but they would still want their watts. They still want their, you know, heavy lifting. >> Yeah, there's always that group of persona that the perception is that if I'm not like dying, I'm not gaining any result, right? Like they they feel like they're wasting time, and it's such a weird thing to have people understand that you don't always have to kill yourself to become successful. And generally, when you're trying to develop skill that's necessarily not necessarily where you want to be at at all. So, continue. >> Yeah. So, those were what really happened. If you ask me, I've not really hacked the CrossFit Hyrox crowd. But for us, the way we've presented movement though, it's it's really to fill the gap that's in the industry. So, if you look at the industry, they've got the CrossFit Hyrox powerlifting, the heavy, you know, go as as heavy as as many reps, or the the yoga, the Pilates, the stretch, and the flexibility kind of practices. So, we really want to stay in between where we are training mobility, the functional range of motion,

[04:04] and also give give you strength that is practical for your everyday life. So, we are trying to fill this gap, and we're not trying to replace the CrossFit, Hyrox, or the, you know, the yoga, Pilates kind of stuff. So, we are we have kind of positioned ourselves quite nicely in here where we are teaching you range of motion, we're teaching you how to open up your hips, open up your shoulders, strengthen your shoulders and hips in the range that is practical for your daily life, so that if you want to do Hyrox, CrossFit, you can still do it, and you can do it without injuring yourself. And then, Pilates and yoga will you will feel stronger in those kind of poses. So, that's kind of where we are like nicely fitting ourselves into, if you ask me. >> Nice, nice, nice. So, you finally you kind of found like a middle ground and niche where you don't threaten anybody's identity, right? You kind of let them keep their identity, and you're just a supplement to assist. Yeah, on my end, I kind of work with a variety of people, and like some of my I used to work with like professional MMA athletes, and I worked with professional judokas. I work with uh some members of the national

[05:05] team of the United States, notably Angelica Delgado and uh Dominique Rodriguez. And what I found with those the athletes that are like the high high high performing athletes, they're actually very happy when they come to work with me cuz they realize that I don't put the weights and the strength first. I always tell any athlete I work with that the most important thing they can do is their sport, right? I'm not going to make you better at grappling, I'm not going to make you better at football, I'm not going to make you better at soccer. No, you get better at those things by doing those things. But, what I can do is improve your ability to perhaps enjoy those things or perform in those things. But, I look at it as vitamins. And then, I have with some CrossFitters who come and see me. And they kind of do I wouldn't say that they necessarily fade away cuz I have one who's like an ex-CrossFitter, ex-ultra-endurance athlete. He's a firefighter who works with me, and he's been with me for years. And, you know, he he'll tell everybody like, "I used to beat myself up at CrossFit, and then when I started to do

[06:06] all the natural movement stuff, he's like, "That's when my body felt the best." And he's like, "And that's when I also noticed that it wasn't about killing himself." But, those are very It It takes a special person to recognize like, "Oh, this isn't This is benefiting me in a way that isn't detrimental to my overall performance, right?" And And it takes a while for them to really recognize that and notice it. So, I see exactly where you're coming from. Now, in terms of your group classes, of anybody seen any of your stuff on Instagram, you have like a variety of population, right? You have older pops, you have younger pops, you have all different types of people. How do you organize a class? Like, what's the first thing that comes to mind? How do you organize a structure? How How many people are in a class to begin with? Like, on average? >> Right. Um we have Well, we we kept our classes to up to 12 to 16 people max. We don't go over 20. So, we try because our I mean, our space is also limited. We want to have enough like comfortable space for everyone to move around and not hurt

[07:08] each other or like get into each other's way. And we also want to have enough attention for everyone in the class so that you know, people are doing the right thing. So, we we start with that like below like in the 15s, that kind of less than 20 people in the class. And the way we structured our classes is based on this principle that we talk about, you know, the finding the middle ground. And really, our base, the way we see it is we have a base of mobility. So, class that's that helps you in your mobility, getting range of motion, understanding that you do not have range, and how do you expand the range, how do you make that range workable for you? So mobility is our base and then we build strength upon mobility. So whatever range you have, you'll build strength upon it. And then when you have strength in basic patterns, right? Just like the push, pull, squat, hinge, the crawling patterns, the basic movement kind of ground pet positions. >> >> And then from there we build efficiency. So efficiency are like dynamic movements, the jumps, the bolts, the things that you want to translate into like high power explosive kind of stuff.

[08:08] So then we build upon that. It's like a pyramid, you know? And then at the top is where we have a play class. So it's like we we believe that if your base of mobility is not strong, it's not it's not wide enough, whatever you build is just going to be like narrow and small. Right? So if you want to play for long for longevity, if you want to continue to be active like for your old age, if you want this pyramid at the top to be big, you have to have a big a big base to be able to support it. So that's how we have structured our classes and then we've like that's how we we then program it according to that objective. And then it kind of like the classes that kind of like interweave around each other. We always have elements of play in every little class, you know, every end of the class. And then we still have a focus, let's say a strength focus class, we always have focusing on the basic patterns, making sure you're doing it right. And then the efficiency will be like conditioning base classes. So that's how we yeah, generally that's how we structure our classes. >> And then if I'm not mistaken, when you do the actual program, like the actual microcycle, the actual day, the actual

[09:09] session, you use like that movement that model, right? Where it's like movement prep, emphasis, and then that's like going to be the focus of the session, and then the combo, three to five movements in that area, and then maybe some conditioning work or something like that at the end. >> Correct. Correct. Correct. So I mean that that is what the movement guideline has been for us. Always start with NDS and then do some skills, teach them some skills, and then practice the skills, and then we put it in a combo, or we put it in a in a play. We like to put put things in play, cuz we find that that's the most effective way of getting adults to engage, you know, in when we do that. >> Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you have to trick them. It's the funniest thing. >> Yeah, correct. So, so then we put it in a play context, and then we close the class. Yeah, that's generally how we run it. >> Nice, nice. And then how do you, let's say you have a client, let's say you're working on something like a Let's pick two different drastic skills. So, let's pick something like maybe the program emphasis is something like a sliding swing up, right? So, hands swing up onto the bar. Let's say you're working on that skill.

[10:10] And obviously you have some people who can do it in the class, but then you have a large level of individuals who can't perform that movement in the class, but that's the emphasis. How do you modify for those individuals? >> Well, our gym our studio is purpose-built for movement, right? So, we do have like bars that's hanging like right above our head, or bars that's hanging like at chest level, or like at waist level. So, we can progress them quite easily because we've got that kind of setup. So, if you don't have a leg swing up, you can't hang in like, you know, swing yourself up, we will put you on the ground level and keep your feet on the ground and give you that still train that pattern, but with a lot of assistance. So, we like to kind of regress by assisting the movement, like getting you to understand the full feeling of the movement by assisting it first before you then, you know, use brute force to get it up. >> Okay, nice. So, you you're just changing the level of the constraint, right? You're instead of giving them the full access to the movement, you're just constraining it to something that's accessible to them. And you can do that

[11:11] to everything, right? Like you can do that to a get-up, you can do that to a squat, you can scaffold the position down. So, let me give you a little insight. You're the first person hearing this. So, we have a little thing that I'm cooking in the back that I've actually been working on for a while, but I haven't presented it. The individual in in Discord who who brought this problem really had me shift the focus, cuz initially what I was working on was MovNat in the past had like this benchmarking system, and Erwan had requested when I got hired to kind of create something that we could stratify so that people had benchmarks that they can kind of link to. And this slowly has evolved into this like how do you assess somebody for MovNat that's not using like a physical therapy kind of assessment? Because I find the physical therapy assessments, although they're very useful, they're useful in like a hallway, right? In a very minuscule position, because they're isolated positions where the body isn't in context. So, I put up a video a long time ago with a physical therapy office physical therapist by the name of Dr. Mario Valdes. And the idea was having somebody

[12:12] perform a get-up, right? So, get up without the use of your hands was the first task, right? And that task turns into can they get up without the use of their hands? And when you think about that, there's only a couple ways you can get up. You can get up as a cross squat, a split squat, or a squat, or a deep knee bend. There's only four ways you can get up without using your hands. >> Yep. >> Now, when they can't do that or if they bias a specific position, so let's say every time they got up, you ask them to get up in three different ways. They get up always in a split squat. >> Yep. >> The next question has to become why don't they use the squat, right? Or why don't they use the deep knee bend? And it's do they not have access to the position or are they limited in range of motion? So, then there you could bias it using like a physical therapy score assessment, like you know, like an ankle mobility screen against the wall or something like that. Then the next task is, let's say they can't do it, then the next task is get up with the use of your hands. And then you see what they bias. Do they avoid a hip hinge pattern? Cuz now you can introduce they can hip hinge, and then every other get-up pattern exists. The reason why I was doing that is to

[13:14] kind of create a system in place that anybody can stratify their clients or students very easily. And in my in my dream world, what I want to create is a system that uses like a belt system in martial arts. So, they wear like a wristband and you as the instructor can know that that's a level one or a white belt. That's a level two participant. That's a level three participant. So, that when you have whatever the program is, you already know what the level one variant of that position is or what the level two variant is and the level three variant is and it makes it much easier to make a like a decision-making process in terms of working with your students. The other thing is that obviously that doesn't cover everything, right? Because you have people who can't get off the ground but can squat 600 lb. I've seen it. So, it's like the other thing would then be once you recognize somebody can get up, you can just continue to provide a the progression of the technique up to a certain point. So, let's say the next step would be can you access all the sitting positions, right? It's a very clear indicator of hip mobility and mobility

[14:15] of the knee. Like can you get into a kneeling position and mobility of the feet cuz flex foot kneeling can be really uncomfortable. And you're just notating for that person like where they are. And then next is well, what's the next thing they got to do? Well, it's crawl, right? Cuz you're just following the developmental cycle. So, then it's and then you can just do that up to a certain point. Now, you don't have to do it to every single movement. That would be a time-consuming assessment protocol. But what you can do is until you realize that they have the lowest level of competency. And then from there have a system in place that kind of gives people general guidelines and directions of which to go because I don't feel like it's appropriate for me to tell anybody how it is that they should coach. Everybody's experiences makes them unique and makes them what they are. I mean, you went from a researcher who was solving how to cure cancer to an exercise professional who owns a facility and has changed so many lives through this thing. So, what I want to do is just provide everybody a piece of toolbox so that they have this ability to utilize it. But like somebody like

[15:16] you, you've already got a facility that's built for natural movement and two, you already have a very robust system in place. Understanding mechanistically like, "Hey, okay. They can't do this position. We have the perfect spot for you to work on this with support, but still train the same pattern." And I think that's the the important message to get across to anybody who's trying to teach natural movement, who is certified, who's having a problem how to organize with groups, is giving them some guidance and some some direction as to which way to go. >> Yep. Yep. >> If you were to give somebody a recommendation on how to work with groups, what would be your top five recommendations? >> How do we work with just a brand new group? >> With with even with a group that they're already working with. Like, they're they're just trying to get natural movement more involved with their group. What would be your first five major tips? >> Well, I think really first give them like easy, simple movements to remember that they can

[16:17] practice at home. That is like homework for us is super important. Like, you come to class, but if you don't do your homework, we will be able to see in the next class, >> >> you know? >> You'll be able to see it over time, right? Because the the thing is consistency and the amount at which you do it. So, if you had somebody who came to your facility and trained only twice a week, they're going to improve at a very slow rate because they don't do anything on the off days. Right? You can't control their behaviors outside. So, I'm really happy that you give them homework. What's tip number two? >> Number two, make the movements accessible for them. Thing if they find I mean, they'll see you perform something that really cool and then when they try and then go like they look clunky or they feel clunky about it and they feel like, "You know what? This is not for me. I don't You know, they wouldn't attempt. Give them bite-size achieve like milestones so that they feel encouraged to do it and they'll keep going. Otherwise, it is quite discouraging. >> 100% >> Yeah, we have some people leave us because they feel like, "Well, you know, I I do what you're doing. I'll never be able to get there, and then they just

[17:18] like >> Not realizing that they can get there. Yeah, I I agree with you. You have to meet people where they are cuz the unfortunately there's there's some people that have bigger egos than others. And the moment they get defeated or crushed or something that they can't they they're like, "Well, not for me." Cuz A, they don't like looking bad, right? Cuz it makes them feel a certain way in front of like the public eye. There's a lot of like psychosocial things that come into play with that. So, I agree with you wholeheartedly. Like when you were working with somebody, you got to meet them in the middle. What's interesting about that point though is that there's some people that love it when you give them a challenge that they can't complete. And now they only want to show up because they want to do the thing that they couldn't do. So, it's really you have to gauge your audience, right? You have to know who you're working with to then approach it the correct way. All right, what's tip number three? >> Tip number three, you have to have a really sharp eye. >> >> So, like for us, we are really really anal about technique, how you're shifting your body weight, which part of

[18:19] your body you're using to execute a movement, which muscles are you recruiting. That for us really is I would say what sets us apart from every other studio because we emphasize almost it's almost like a like a inter-interlink with our physiotherapy, understanding of the anatomy, your body body mechanics, and how you put it in a movement, and how do you enhance that movement and make it efficient comes from really understanding that mindful connection, you know, with that body part. So, the coach will need to have a really keen eye of of seeing where they're shifting their body weight and to correct them even if the angle is like a 10° shift backwards, that will make a whole lot of difference for them, and that's what keeps them coming. So, yeah, having a really sharp eye to see to see body weight shift. >> Yeah. Or by Yeah, yeah, you want to make sure that they're connecting the dots internally. >> Yeah. >> when I'm like teaching somebody like get-ups for the first time, I'm always very like I want to make sure that they're making the connection internally as to what's

[19:20] being what has tension and what has relaxation. That's why I always think like that's the best place to start. That's why we have the movement tree, the roots are getting up off the floor. It's because it teaches you every fundamental human movement principle that exist. Tension and relaxation, sequence and timing. Body weight shift, body weight transfer. Those are like the most important ones. And if you can get people to start connecting those dots, it transfers to literally every other technique that they'll learn and it's so critical. So yeah, I agree with you. Paying attention and then having the the desire to really help somebody fundamentally understand that. You know, I can I see a lot of young coaches get frustrated when their client isn't getting it and they get upset. You know, they're like, "Oh bro, how how why is it so hard for you to like squeeze your butt cheek?" You know, and it's just like >> >> um they have to learn to put it in a different context or provide a different constraint to make the dots click for them. Okay, we got two more. So what's what's like a fourth tip you'd give? So key and eye, what what's after that? >> Um

[20:21] so for me within the group context, learning how to personalize progressions for each people. So for me that's really important. Yeah. >> That's the biggest thing. >> Yeah, correct. Cuz uh if you're just using a blanket movement and you expect everybody to do it, there will be people who are like exceeded that movement and some people that are just lagging behind. Those people lagging behind will just not do it right and they probably will injure themselves. So having the ability to personalize it for them while the group is still performing the same movement, but then giving them progressions that is achievable as I said just now, that would be the Yeah, for me that that's really the value of a group class. >> Yeah, especially like when you understand where somebody is fundamentally and you can give them that right progression that's still challenging but not so challenging that they fail constantly, but that they can have some measurable sense of success, I think is massive. And then your last piece of tip, your last tip. >> Last piece is have fun. Make sure they have fun in the class.

[21:22] Make it fun, you know, make it like relatable, like they can see that this is like like oh, I I I know I we tried to do this at home, but I couldn't, you know, like oh, I needed this when I had to pick up my child when I had to pick up the groceries from the ground, you know, that kind of stuff. Make it like applicable like outside of the gym. It's like life doesn't revolve around the gym. I think I always believe that you're made to train so that you are stronger outside for the outside world, you know. So, yeah. That's what I would say. >> It's a very interesting proposition you put up there, right? Where you said life doesn't revolve around the gym. For most people, it is, right? Like their their modern sense of fitness is the gym is the most important thing in their life and I can see where they're coming from, but they're losing the context, right? The most important thing is their life, the gym should support it. And what's weird is that those same people, the training doesn't necessarily support the life that they try and live, which has always been like a really weird kind of thing to kind of touch on. So,

[22:24] yeah, that's interesting. Well, I'm hoping like the conversations like this help provide some of the members in our community that own facilities that our coaches are trying to figure out how to implement this in groups. And to summarize, one of the things is in terms of programming, you follow the same programming methodology that's used in the the MoveNat context and manual, right? So, it's movement prep, which is NDS, and then maybe selecting some movements that that are going to demonstrate or teach the skill that is going to be the emphasis of the day, which would be the next part of the program, the emphasis. You're generally picking one to two movements there that is going to be the skill that you're trying to accomplish and teach, and always provide context as to why you're teaching this thing. How does it relate to their life? And then after that, it's the combo. And the combo can be a variety of things that either supplement the skill or involve some kind of mobility or some kind of capacity work, strength, endurance, etc. And that your skill, if it can, should probably involve some sense of play because it's

[23:25] the most engaging style of teaching and it makes it enjoyable and it makes it memorable. And that the most important thing to have as a coach is the ability to progress and regress for your clients within that program setting, right? So, if the movement, we use the example of the sliding swing before, if you have a facility that has different height bars, that's a real easy one to progress. But the same thing, let's say the movement was a rocking squat get-up, loaded, right? So, you have a let's say a kettlebell or a dumbbell or a medicine ball, and you rock to your deep squat and stand up. But you have some participants in your group that cannot get into a deep squat even with the the support of a counterweight or a load, maybe you break them up into two sections, something like a bodyweight rock, and then a pull squat where they can sit down and start to engage at the bottom point of the range. So, that's up to the coach to have the experience and the knowledge to be able to. But us at MoveNat, we're working on trying to help provide that framework and ideas, so please be on the lookout for that. And then the last piece is just make it fun, make it

[24:26] enjoyable, and meet your participants where they are in the middle. Did I miss anything? >> No, that was right. >> Sweet. Well, Aline, I won't I won't keep you. I I really appreciate you for having this conversation. When we send this out to everybody, they're going to have some footage of the the way you the classes are run, things like that, and I'm hoping that'll help put everything in the context. So, I truly appreciate you for taking this call and and joining me for this and sharing your knowledge and your expertise for the audience. >> Always, thank you.
