TITLE: Natural Movement & Parkour with Loren Fjord
VIDEO ID: YPKG9b5ahmA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YPKG9b5ahmA
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-30
DURATION: 35:44
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] For those of you who don't know, right, I want to take the time to introduce you. I mean, it's been a while since we've chatted live. Lauren is a movement master. You're probably one of the most smoothest moving people I've ever met or seen. He's a L3 certified person. He's got a lot of history in parkour. He's one of the only men to pass L3. Very small number of people pass L3 their first time ever doing it, and you're one of those. Claim that. You're definitely somebody who lives the lifestyle, right? I mean, you live that natural lifestyle. You move naturally. I mean, everything you do is kind of in service of all that stuff, and you're definitely somebody in the community who helps out as much as he can. So, you've always been a pleasure to interact with. You're the owner of Primal Health Co, right? I believe it's the name of the company. Human Wild, yeah. >> Human Wild, cool. There you go. Apologies. With that, what's new? Yeah, well, thank you. It's good to be on here. I try I aim for the integration. I think that that should be we should all be aspiring to integrate what we do with how we live more. But, what's new? I've got a little baby now that's almost well, the second one, but a baby now. The other one's not a baby anymore. The

[01:00] little one is 4 months and a couple days, and she's working on crawling right now, and which is she can't quite sit up on her own, but it's really beautiful to see she's determined to crawl, and it's it's kind of funny to see somebody that small working on that cuz her brother didn't crawl until at least a month or so later. But, but yeah, so baby baby's what's new. What's what's funny is like I remember you've always put pictures of your son, you know, like where you're like videos of and he's jacked. He was big. He was Yeah, his him and his sister were both born the same birth weight, but he was 18 lbs at 3 months, and his sister's 12, like 12 and 1/2 or something. So, like the the rate of growth and yeah, he's a bit of a monster, but he's great. I know that you actually have some big news that you can share kind of with the community, something that you're actually putting together yourself. Can you talk to us about it? Like, what what what inspired you to do it, and what is it? I guess before we jump in, I'll just say for anyone that's watching this, anyone that's part of the MoveNat community, if you go over to my pinned post, my top pinned post on my page, and

[02:01] you just comment MoveNat, I've got an exclusive thing for MoveNat followers, and I'll send it to your DMs, and I I can remind you at the end of this live call, too, and tell you a little bit more about what that actually is. But, yeah, go ahead and do that. Yeah, I mean, let's save that for a bit later. Let's just chat a bit, and then then we can jump into the details on that. >> All right, so talk to me then, like what's new and cooking in the community itself? Like, what are you doing natural movement-related? I know you're already prepping a bunch of people for L3. I had some people already DM me like, "Oh, I'm working with Lauren, getting ready for my L3." Yeah, that's a cool one, too. I guess something I've been thinking about that fits with that, and to kind of plug L3 that's coming up in September, MoveNat, is just the idea of performance versus training. And like cuz that's an example of an event where you are showing up trying to perform your best. You already kind of mentioned it where that's the way I treated it when I went to my L3 in Colorado. My goal was to try and flash everything because I knew that I was capable of individual pieces, but to actually show up and do them all back-to-back, you know, there's a bit of luck involved, there's a bit of skill, but it's thinking about things from a

[03:02] performance side rather than from um a training side, where you're looking for a mechanical disadvantage versus every advantage that you could give yourself to perform at the highest level. But, like you mentioned, yeah, two of my clients are going to be there, I believe. Two really amazing ladies, Shelby and Camille. If you guys don't know who they are, you should go follow them. Camille's handle, if I say it off the top of my head, is Nature's Movements. And then uh Shelby's Shelby's is Shelby. dot or Shelby_moves. Yeah, so go follow them. One of them is already a level three, and she's going to be helping out, I believe, Shelby, and then Camille's going to be going there and working on getting her level three. But, yeah, I was kind of having conversations with her, too, about that idea of going in with the mindset of trying to obviously do your best, trying to get everything knocked off at the event itself, and how that really takes the form of thinking about it from the performance side of things, where you're actually trying to be lazy. You're trying to be smart. You're trying to be efficient, so that you have that longitude through the gauntlet of all

[04:03] these things. And for me, I think about it as kind of like big cat philosophy. Like, if you see a big cat on the plains, like they're lazy until they it's go time. And then they lay everything on the line when they actually have to do the thing. Versus humans in training, and we're one of the few humans that really put a lot of emphasis on training for results outside of just play for skill development, you're looking for that mechanical disadvantage, where you are trying to break yourself down to build yourself up. And that's what you would be doing leading up to like an L3 event, rather than taking that mentality at the actual event itself, which I I saw a little bit of even at the event that I went to, where people were like beating themselves up more than I would in a thing, and I'm like, I did the thing, I'm going to conserve, and then try and do my best on the next thing. But, I guess that's just the mindset that I bring to it. >> Yeah, you were very strategic in your your approach, and you're always kind of like a forward thinker. Have you seen the This is kind of an off-topic thing, but it just came to my head when you were talking about people training for results versus capability. The American College of Sports Medicine, they just updated their resistance training guidelines. They haven't done a an update since 2009. I think they reviewed

[05:06] 300,000 participants and something like 147 or 157 meta-analysis. And they've come come to this conclusion that everything works, and that the main major important point for anybody to gain any kind of improvement is actually just the consistency of training. And when I saw that, I was like, "Oh, this is kind of like validation." Because it's so weird, like we live in this this industry where it's very tool-heavy. People are like, "You can't get strong unless you use a barbell, or you can't get powerful unless you use a kettlebell." And it's like that's the silliest thing I've ever heard. Those things are just tools. They're just constraints. The technique trumps everything. It's like you're just trying to get an organism that moves. How can this organism move around or manipulate set objects, right? Because movement is just a behavior to solve a task and a problem. >> >> And if that's the case, then all of these techniques are just trying to solve something. So, every tool could potentially be valid because it gives your system a different input. It's inevitable. But, it just kind of makes me chuckle. Yeah, a lot of the guidelines and stuff, it's interesting how slow like credentialed institutions

[06:06] can move, where it's like somebody could come to that conclusion obviously very easily on their own, but then it's to make broad-sweeping guidelines. And when it comes to the masses and the general population, I think the there's so much low-hanging fruit, like you were saying, like you basically do anything consistently, and you can make see some form of results. And in part, that's kind of the the approach that I take with my private clients that I work with is this idea of narrative shift, moving away from, like you said, like the perfect implement or the perfect methodology or the perfect program even that has like bro splits or like very specific things that you do on certain days and like certain lengths of time, where in reality, if we shift our mindset, and this is the way that I program for my client to where you you've assessed yourself, so you know where your weak links are. So, if you have time in a given week, you already know where you need to start applying yourself for the biggest return on investment, and then how much time do I have? Do I have 10 minutes? That can be effective. Do I have an hour? That can be effective, too. And then it's accumulating these small things, and these small things make the big things.

[07:08] So, like with guidelines like this, where they're like, you know, minimums of resistance training XYZ, like yeah, it's great, but like you said, it's, you know, I guess it retrospectively it can be validating to have institutions say things that we have we already know to be true. But, yeah, the consistency and the mind shift around like the little things can actually aggregate and add up to really big things. I feel like it's the paradigm shift that I help most people with, where they kind of fall into this all-or-nothing trap, where they're like, "I have to do everything perfectly or really intense, otherwise why even do it?" >> The The intensity always gets me, you know, like I just had a client now that was dealing with like a UCL tear. He wanted, like 6 weeks ago he wanted to do like all kinds of crazy stuff, and I'm like, "You have a UCL tear. Like, start off with some isometrics. Let's start off >> find a lot of people that want crazy or nothing. And then like oh, I I've worked with plenty of clients in person, too, and remote, where the things we're doing are quite boring, and like, you know, we're not trying to overdo it. Cuz ultimately, when you're trying to adapt, it's like, don't die, don't re-injure yourself, make progress, get the resources on board for sleep and

[08:09] nutrition to make the progress. But, then you're like in this marginal zone in the training, and then the next day they go out and they go snowboarding, and they like hit a tree. You have all these variables. There's such a gap or discrepancy between the moderation I don't really like the word moderation, but that moderation in training versus life is at speed and has so many unpredictable variables. And so, it's it's this ebb and flow. And then within that, too, you get this idea, too, that like training shouldn't hurt. And while generally I say don't train through pain, you know, all of those things, understanding and interpreting sensations, like what is discomfort, what is fatigue, what is truly pain, what is causing damage, what is something that is an irritation that I need to feel to actually get to the next level. And sometimes people that are novice exercisers can't distinguish between those sensations, and it's like, you know what? There's going to be some local inflammation, your body's going to be a bit pissed off, but you are on the right path. If you do nothing, then you're going to, you know, build momentum in an even worse direction, and then probably have a catastrophic injury later, rather than some mild discomfort. >> You talking about the sensations of

[09:10] pain, some people don't even have the sensation of tension and relaxation. And they they're like at a fundamental level, something like you know, it's like they're posting their hand, and it's like, "Hey, do you feel this working?" And they're like, "I don't feel anything." Cuz there's just such a disconnect between them and their body. Yeah. It's a thing, but it's always wonderful to see them grow from that, right? When they start to make those connections, and they start to move well, and they start to fundamentally understand principles, it's always such an wonderful thing to see. What What else is on your mind? Well, I guess I jotted down a couple topics that I thought were were kind of interesting, some that kind of parallel parkour. One of them was this idea of of aesthetics, and like where aesthetics fall into training. And I think that the classic way that people talk about it is thinking about like a bodybuilder versus like a strength athlete. And then you have like moving more into the movement culture, you have like task-based skill set versus doing something that looks good. And even more if you go a little bit farther back to where I started parkour, there was the big discussion of like the purists and people that say like parkour is just A to B efficiency, no flips, no

[10:13] frills, that's free running. And it's it's interesting to take it more into that plane. And I I bring it all the way through to skateboarding where like Lords of Dogtown, the the scene in the '60s in California when people were first starting to really popularize skateboarding in urban scenes, there was this notion of you can do it and then you can do it and make it look good. And this idea of making something look good outside of like the vanity of it, but actually having it be a proxy for biomechanical efficiency or longevity. Like a piece that tells us within like the natural movement in parkour, if you land quietly, if it looks good, and it's sound, the chances of it being good form go up rather than just slinging yourself there, having it look kind of shitty, and then making the jump or whatever the thing is, but you don't have full control over it, it doesn't look as aesthetic, that can mean also that it's not as safe for you to be doing that and you're kind of punching above your your weight class. So, that was one of the ideas I was kind of

[11:13] toying around with, too, is doing something and making it look good, that ownership can lead to longevity in the sport. 20 years since I started parkour, and I can attest to that where like I don't have shot knees. Everyone said you're like, "Oh, stop jumping, you're going to have bad knees." And those sorts of things. I attribute part of that to caring about how it looks, how it sounds. That can be an easy proxy for people to use is if it feels good, looks good, sounds good, you're probably moving well. If it doesn't, you might be doing damage. I heard that called the poop test. Does it Does it look like And you know, I I was working when I was getting a certification years ago. It was actually Mike Boyle's certified functional strength coach, but it was one of his I think the guy's name is Michael Carr. I think this is his name. He was like, "You know, if you're trying to figure out whether your client's doing it right." He goes, "The easiest test is the poop test. Does it look like shit?" You know, and then fast forward, I don't know how many years, you're doing MovNat. This idea or natural movement is the idea of effectiveness and efficiency, right? Effectiveness is the job. Efficiency, did you make it

[12:14] less dangerous? Did you make it smoother? Did you make it cost you less? Does it sound quieter? Does it look strange, right? So, all those things are obviously very very valid. The second point you kind of discussed with people telling you you're going to have shot knees and all that stuff. Why does everybody assume that the human body's made of glass? Well, there's like this working assumption that we work like an inanimate object that has a finite number of uses rather than a a living tissue that replaces virtually all the cells in its body over the course of 7 years. Have you ever read this? I haven't. It's about my body what you just said. It's Biotensegrity by Graham Scarr. It's about how the human structure from the cellular level down to the mechanical level is just a tensegrity structure. And it's the one that coined the term biotensegrity. But yeah, it's it's crazy to me how people are just like, "Oh, no, don't do that. You're going to break." And it's like, "Woah." >> Yeah. I'll break if I've never done it before, right? Yeah, and there might be some parallels there, too, with like the plasticity like of our mind and as we age and if we get set in our ways and narratives, then

[13:16] we do become more rigid and like metaphorically and literally where, you know, like you said, if we don't do the things, we become more rigid, less plastic, less trained, then we will snap and break and eventually people do, but often I feel like people write off those injuries or the aging process to aging physical. >> >> Yeah. Yeah, it's just kind of a cop-out. >> Yeah. So, I want to go back to something you were just discussing before, parkour. So, you have been doing that since before you even dabbled in quote unquote natural movement, right? You were already like a really really skillful mover before you went through the whole MovNat program and finished it. Now you're an L3 certified guy, you're certified for life. Parkour has always, from my perspective, even before I got into natural movement, I've always looked at it as like the extreme expression of skill and capability, right? That and climbing are like the two things that are like, this is the the apex of skill, you know, expression. And I'm not talking about it in the context of sport. I'm talking about it in the context of just moving from day to day, right? Because when you look at

[14:17] something like parkour or free running or any of those expressive things, they're done at speed, they're done with precision, and they're done at such a repeated contact pace that it's it's it's mind-boggling to some point. You know, when I I did I've done parkour in the past. I had a parkour coach, and it was something that I was always fearful of, right? And then you talked before like breaking the jump or whatever it's called. And when I was going through L3, we had to learn some of the more advanced like parkour movements, and it's really just like the tip of the iceberg in reality, right? L3 is >> >> you're getting your introduction into like parkour. It's not like real real parkour cuz we cover all those other movements. But can you speak to that and how it's involved in natural movement? Yeah, well, it's interesting because even in your definition that you just gave saying that like parkour is the most extreme expression. And I would actually challenge that definition to say that parkour is actually the most simple human movements, and then you are witnessing a practitioner that has taken

[15:17] the basic human movements to the extreme. But parkour by definition isn't extreme or not extreme. It is the continual fostering of the basic movements of walking, balancing, running, jumping, those sorts of things. And then we see it, we have the privilege of witnessing it at the highest levels on social media every single day. When you type in parkour, you see the best. You're not going to see somebody that's just starting cuz nobody wants to see that. So, I I actually made a reel about this recently breaking up the definition differences for the layperson, not the like minutia of gymnastics versus parkour. And basically what I said to sum it up is gymnastics is attempting at or building to the most complex human movements over the most measured and metered and sterile terrain. Where you have the exact same vault whether you're in China or the in the US, no matter what, you know, gymnasium you're in, it's the exact same vault, the exact same measurements across the board. Yeah, and then in parkour, it is every scenario, every handrail, every um, you know, fire hydrant, retaining wall,

[16:19] wherever you are, you're at the subjective whims of Mother Nature or an an architect that did not have you in mind. You are in your built environment and you're trying to balance, jump, run, get from here to there or play or experiment. And so, it's you have to be competent enough in those basic movements to adapt them to the most diverse terrain. And then eventually, obviously, the elite expression of gymnastics is insane, and the elite expression of parkour is insane, but they both start very basic, just like everything starts basic. Yeah, you're looking at it through the practice of parkour. I was looking at it through the the uh high-level application, which is why I say that to me the definition was it's the most extreme. What you're coming from, fundamentally, the movements are similar. Totally. And I think that the Turkish get-up is is the most fundamental human pattern. Totally. And why I think it's so important to make that distinction is because that's the gap that keeps people from doing parkour most is this illusion that you have to do it extreme,

[17:20] otherwise you can't do it. And And this leads me to something, too, where thinking about who actually benefits most from natural movement, MovNat, or parkour training in general. And it's an interesting question because it's two-part. Who benefits most and who is most likely to engage in it? And the second question, typically parkour, young people are more likely to engage in it, and MovNat, a little bit more sophisticated adult is going to be the person that gravitates towards that. And partly that's these narratives and these languages that we've built about them. But I would argue that both parkour and natural movement, really they're they're pretty synonymous, but there's culture behind them that that separates them. But who benefits most is going to be the the elderly, the older person, the adult. Because as you have more skill and more balance, it is more consequential in your life what you can and can't do. When you're young, you can like walk poorly, you can get

[18:21] around, you know, so-so, but you're you can hinge on your youth to be kind of strong if you're a man, just without any training, you know, like your youth, you can kind of just get along. But the irony of that is the the younger you start, the higher your ceiling becomes when you're older. But it takes a bit of ego checking to actually want to start doing natural movement or parkour as an adult. And so, that's kind of just an interesting piece of And Shelby, who one of my long-time clients, literally what I was going to try and shout out cuz she does parkour for the elderly. Yeah. Yeah, which uh both both Camille and Shelby uh inspire me on the daily, and it's been a pleasure. I love working with them. Shelby is working a lot with older folks in parkour, and I I love seeing it just on her Instagram cuz I've done it, too, and it's it's so rewarding to start to break people's like sticking points. Yeah, where what they what they their limits that they put on themselves about what things are. And ultimately, it's just expanding your comfort zone a little bit on these basic

[19:22] movements. And And it's more like I said, it's more consequential as an elderly person if you feel more capable, more mobile, than the needle that moves a little bit less when you're young. And it's like, "Okay, I can already run around. Oh, I can run around better." But as an older person, if you like aren't afraid of falling and you can climb over a little wall, like that's revolutionary for you. I think that was one of the biggest changing points in my career. I was working with an elderly person, and they had come off of like some debilitating back injury, and when I was communicating them with one of their goals was, they were like, "Oh, I want to be able to play with my grandson, but I'm scared." And I was like, "What are you scared of?" She's like, "Well, I'm scared that I won't be able to get up off the floor." And I was like, "You're scared you wouldn't be able to get off the floor?" She was like, "Yeah, cuz when I'm on the ground, it's a struggle." And I showed her how to do a prone get-up, and I showed her how to do a little bit of a tripod get-up. And her whole life shifted at that moment. She was like, "This was the most useful thing I've ever done." And then she was just telling me about how much safer she felt. She was calling me week and all, "My Brian, you don't understand how good I feel. I'm just going to go on the

[20:23] floor now on purpose so I can get up and I can still do it." And it was just such a beautiful moment. And that was like the perfect shift for me. You know what it is? It's not about performance, it's about confidence. And it's like I mentioned earlier when we were talking about how you program. The way you you described it, it's very similar to like how I think. Like you assess somebody, what's your lowest level of competency? Let's work from there. And I think that's a a beautiful rule of thumb to have. I think often times people approach the opposite. They don't even worry what your level of competency is. They're like, "Let's go jump on something." And it's like, then they jump. You know, and that's where you get stuff. I worked at a boutique gym and we had a trainer take somebody off the floor who he perceived to be in shape cuz the person looked like they were in shape. And he tried to get them to just start off with box jumps. And the person wasn't very coordinated. Box and stuff like box jumps aren't anything crazy, but it was like a little 18-in box. The person went to jump up and they didn't make it. They went shin first into a wooden box, broke the shin, went over, broke the oval, dislocated the shoulder, and it turned into a disaster. And it was like, "Why didn't

[21:23] you just find out where that person was and then work from there?" But it was like people have this mindset of, "Ooh, we got to do this crazy-looking thing for you to get in shape." And it's like Yeah. And that's often a product of coaches when they are new, they kind of just latch onto a system or a methodology of training and they can't really get past that piece. One thing that I thought of while you were just talking there is it it's interesting there's this kind of inverse between generally older people underestimate their abilities because there's more at stake and younger people overestimate their abilities because they assume they're young. They're like they see something, "Oh, I could do that if I wanted to do that." And they put it off and then they kind of get in trouble later on in life. Yeah, that's a that's an interesting one. Yeah. All right, so before we continue kind of move forward, I actually do want to get back to something you talked about earlier, right? This this special thing you have. Yeah. Talk talk about it. Yeah, so yeah, like you know, you've got the the L3 at the beginning of September, my thing is the end of September. And I guess to start talking about it, it goes back 20 years ago. Kind of like I was saying when I started parkour, it all comes

[22:24] back to I saw a video on the internet in a friend's basement and it showcased something that I felt I needed to experience and know and feel in real life. And from watching that video, it led me to buying a one-way ticket to fly across the Atlantic to go to England, spent my, you know, last dollar on a one-way ticket to go there. I'd never left the country before and I didn't have a cell phone at the time. I didn't know anyone there, no one was expecting me to be there. I never talked to these people before and the reception that I was met with when I got there was indescribable and that was a like a moment in my life that completely changed the trajectory of the next 20 years of my life experiencing that. And there was kind of three big takeaways or pivots in my life from that experience. And one of them is this proxy mindset that like talk about on some of the podcasts I'm on and on here we talked about proxies a little bit already, but parkour was that proxy for me. Physical

[23:25] practice is that proxy for me. It it opened up my mind to this idea that it's more than just the movement or identifying with a modality, identifying with parkour. It's about what this actually means for my life. And then the second one is this idea of while I was there in person, I was immersed in the culture with people of vastly different skill sets and different levels of skill. They were literally the best in the world. Daniel Ilabaca spending time with him on the sidewalks, going around town, Phil Doyle, the Storror guys before the Storror guys. And they were like a lot younger at the time. This was pre-Storror. Um but at the time, Daniel Ilabaca was and I personally think is still the goat, the greatest mover of all time. And being there and seeing him in person, but you have like that skill level and then you had people that could hardly do anything and were sharing space on the same sidewalk. Everyone is eye to eye. Everyone is getting the same face time and learning. And it's within that kind of mixed-level community, you

[24:27] start to understand a level of physical empathy that I have brought into fatherhood and brought into being a husband, in my business. And the last one is just the idea of kind of being able the I like the idea of overcoming obstacles and like the cliché things of parkour, applying those to to everything outside of parkour. And that that that narrative kind of forces you to seek a balance between what you believe in your mind versus what's real objectively in the physical world. And so it's like with all three of those things, they're things that somebody could limit to the physical practice of parkour, but for me, I extrapolated it and meant something so much greater to me. So long story short, all of this coming up on 2026 is my 20th year anniversary of that and my goal is to create kind of like a time machine for people to experience what I experienced in Boise and, you know, having a chef cater the meals, sharing a house, sharing that time, watching old documentaries about parkour, and just kind of having a nostalgic four days and really opening it up to people that think like, you

[25:28] know, parkour is so extreme, but bringing it down to a level where literally anyone can do this. One of the women that are signed up for it, she's in her 60s, a lady from California. And so it's going to be a broad swath of of skill levels of people to kind of recreate that dynamic community and then really expand on the culture back then and what that was like. giving people kind of an opportunity to get in at that ground zero feeling and then leaving the retreat, following it up with a six-month mentorship just around the people that were there to pick up on the threads that, you know, we started so that we can cement whatever we did for an actual, you know, something that's going to last for the rest of their lives rather than just a a moment in time. What you're doing is something that's very very impactful, right? Because you're essentially tying the psychosocial, cultural, and movement is so much greater than the actual practice of movement. And when you're doing it in a community, it's like what you're going to build, you know, it is something that I experienced when I did my L3. You know, you're in a room with 11 other people

[26:30] going through the same thing, learning the same thing, watching all the different skills, watching all the stuff. And it's a beautiful thing. And what you're doing is similar around something that impacted you so greatly. So something that impacted you so meaningfully is what I meant to say. And I know based on, you know, the interactions that I've had with you that this is going to be huge for anybody who goes. Because your ability to take something that is complex or even something that's simple and make it meaningful for somebody and make them be able to connect those. I mean, literally anybody I've ever spoken to who's interacted with had a very positive experience. And I can only imagine, you know, having meals catered, you mentioned that there's going to be room and board, right? >> Yeah, we're all staying in the same house, a big house. Everybody's there, breakfast, lunch, dinner, we're having it together. We're spend And so like it's the downtime in the gaps of any event that I've ever been to that is the most impactful. And I really like it's there's such an energy in that. Yeah. There's an energy in that that that people can walk away with as as kind of a catalyst for the next chapter of their

[27:32] life. And I'm not trying to say that I'm going to plan the perfect curriculum cuz I can't. I'm creating the container for it. And I trust in that the people that come, their dynamism and like what they bring to it is a huge part of this. I'm super excited. It's going to be a super special event, but permission to explore. What's that? It's having the permission to explore. I think those are the the most meaningful moments and that's where you learn the most. That's where you interact the most. The really cool part is the the addition of the six-month mentorship afterwards. Yeah. Where you can continue whatever ideas, whatever conversations, whatever relation >> to bring the best of both because I I work with a lot of people remotely and I have a lot of, you know, profound change in people's lives. But like you said and like I knew when I bought that one-way ticket, like I knew I needed to be there boots on the ground. Like you there's only so much that can happen remote. Like it's it's the building and the capacity that happens remote, but it's the magic and it's the actual like shifting inside your soul that happens in person. And it's that anchor needs to

[28:33] be there. And so, you know, it's it's not a workshop, it's not a certification, it's an experience, it's a gathering. Yeah. And I think one one thing to tack on here, too, that we we kind of skirted around, but it's this idea, too, of somebody that would be interested in this and exposure to this for whatever reason that isn't a competitive athlete or somebody that is doing this on a competitive level, they're doing it for personal development and, you know, like meaning and growth. Somebody that is training in general, I feel like and not competitive, should aspire and can reasonably aspire to be in the 1% of the general population, but still in the bottom 10% of the elite. Because the elite make up such a like the talking about elite skill um in any discipline in sport, they make up such a small portion of the top. But myself included, I am nowhere near the top of parkour athletes and the people that are pushing the sport today and the acquisition of these incredible skills that people are pushing farther and farther and younger and younger, I am

[29:34] nowhere near the top of that. But when it comes to general movement, I am in the point, you know, 99999999 like top top tier the percentile of the average person where I can, you know, jump 10-ft gaps up high, not be afraid mentally, like all this stuff that seems impressive to somebody that has never done it. It's at the bottom of the elite, but it's at the very top of the general population. So, all that to say that I think it's a really reasonable expectation to, with a little bit of time, little bit of training, to push yourself to the very top of the gen pop in all of your physicality. And I think that's where people should aspire to be. And it's I'm not going to say it's not hard, but it's it's a very attainable goal from just about anyone. It's attainable if you look at it from this perspective of where am I in my movement journey and how can I push the needle to the right? You know, often times when I see people talk about realistic strength expectations, you know, we'll say these are like, you know, credentialed fitness professionals. You know, like, "Oh, you're not strong unless you can move two times your body weight or 1.5 times

[30:35] your body weight on, let's say, like a deadlift or a squat or whatever." And for me, it's like, reasonable reasonable expectation. But if you're talking about, you know, John Doe who hasn't worked out in 15 years and can probably pick up 60 lbs off the floor without hurting themselves, you're saying that that person is not strong. And that's correct, but you're taking away the act of then becoming stronger. And we often times people go with a mindset of, "Well, I'm not strong, why am I going to bother trying?" And it's like >> comes back to the all or nothing binary. Exactly. Exactly. It's the relativity that's important. Yeah, it's the relativity that's important. And that's what people need to understand. Don't compare yourself to the person next to you or the person in front of you or the person behind you. Look at yourself in the mirror and say, "How can I improve?" And the practice of movement and the people you surround yourself is what's going to drive that needle to the right. And your event is like the perfect opportunity. Whether they trained, whether they haven't trained, whether they're new to it, like you said, when you did your experience in England,

[31:35] everybody was there. Somebody who was elite to somebody who was new. And it's like, that's the beauty of this. Look, one of the the most gifted movers I've ever met, Travis Brewer, he just actually did his L1 in Miami. I worked with him at EAP back in the day. He's an animal. But he started his parkour journey morbidly obese. And that's where he started. He didn't start with get-ups, he didn't start with barbells, he didn't start with bodybuilding. The dude started with parkour and freerunning. Yeah. And he integrated everything else afterwards. And when you see him, he's very much like you, a complete mover. And you could lift something heavy, you could jump really high, you could jump really far, you could jump multiple times, you can climb an object, you can carry a thing for a long time. You even done grappling. So, you know a little bit on the grappling side. I know it's not something that you actively pursue now, but you've experienced it, you've done it. So, you're you're like somebody who I would define as, "Oh, this is a capable human being. If hits the fan, you can probably figure something out." >> >> You know, and and that's what I think

[32:35] natural movement as a whole, people like you, anybody who's in this this environment is striving one way or another to push forward to the community. It's like we just want everybody to be capable cuz we know how powerful that is when somebody experiences it. Once they experience it, they're like, "I can do things?" That belief propagates into every other aspect of your life outside of it. Work, relationships, social interactions, music. Music. And you might like just pick up an instrument and now you're moving better and you're like, "Oh man, I think I can apply these same things to the thing I'm practicing, my hobby." So, it's it's it's a beautiful thing. I'm actually really excited for you and the event you're putting on. And I awesome that you're doing it on your 20-year anniversary. Yeah, and just to give another random person a an Instagram shoutout, there's a guy Doc_PK or no, PK_Doc. He's 60 years old, he's doing parkour. I don't know his story, I don't know when he started, but it's an example of obviously everyone can raise their relative ceiling. The younger you

[33:37] start, the higher that ceiling goes, but this is somebody in their 60s that is doing beautiful big jumps, great balance, vaulting, moving around, and it's really inspiring and cool to see what we have told ourselves about aging, all these stories in our head, and what's what's real. And like you said, experiencing it and experiencing it in a community of supportive people, yeah, there's nothing really like it. And it's it permeates into every aspect of your life, and it should and could elevate every aspect of your life in a way that is immeasurable. You know, it's but yeah, so I guess all that to say that what I mentioned at the beginning of this call, Yeah, I'm going to ask how to somebody sign up. Yeah, if you comment MoveNat on my main pin post, I will send you all the details to the event, of course, but also if you're a MoveNat follower here, it has I'll give you a $500 off coupon for that event. I know there already some places some tickets sold, so I think there's like seven spots left right now. It's a hard cap of 10, it's a small small group of people, small cohort, but comment MoveNat on my main pin post and I'll shoot you over a

[34:37] discount link to that. So. Awesome. Awesome. I'm really excited for that. Anything you want to add before we head out? I know you got things to do. Yeah. No, I I think we covered a lot of fun things. Yeah, it's it's always a pleasure. Thanks for having me on. It was a pleasure. Thank you for taking the time out of your day to have the conversation. And where can people find you? Where can people follow you? Yeah, just Lauren Fjod first and last name on Instagram. That's about it. I'm on here sometimes. And if you chat in my DMs, it's actually me. It's not AI, it's not some automation or somebody else. So, we got Jeffrey in the chat there with some fire, somebody I know. Cool. Nice. All right, well, I I will >> beast beast and mover up in Canada. Oh, that's awesome. Well, man, it was like always, it was a pleasure having a conversation with you. I hope you have yourself a wonderful rest of your evening. It was a pleasure having a chat with you. Excited to see how this event goes. I hope you capture a lot of footage. I really want to see what this, you know, ends up looking like and what it becomes. So, very excited for you.

[35:38] Good luck with family life and everything moving forward, all right? Yeah, you too, brother.
