TITLE: Shaping the Future of MovNat Medical 2.0
VIDEO ID: Zn5MFmowMvE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zn5MFmowMvE
UPLOAD DATE: 2025-08-05
DURATION: 24:14
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:44] Clark, how we doing? >> Hey, Brian. What's going on, man? How are you? >> I'm doing good. It's good to see you. I know we missed out yesterday for some technical difficulties, but I'm glad we're able to have this conversation now. >> Yeah, me too. >> Yeah. So, I'll take I'll take the opportunity to introduce to the MoveNet community, anybody who hasn't met you before. So, Clark Tanner, uh, owner of Thrive Physical Therapy, I met him back I correct me if I'm wrong. I think it was either 2021 or 2022 in Virginia, and I was impressed right off the bat from the the the location, right? The the moment you walk in, it's like a really nice office building. I was glad to be in the office building with how cold it was, too. And uh cuz it was it was December. It was free. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was freezing. And then I walked in and I just remember seeing, you know, the the 2x4s that that little pitted area that you have and you you had like the the the rock things and all the stuff. And I was like, "Oh, wow." And then I got to meet you. And

[01:45] when I met you, I realized you were somebody who was putting into practice exactly what they learned. You know, and the unfortunate reality is sometimes when you meet a professional who's just spent all this time learning this stuff and then you go to visit them and they're doing nothing that they learned and they're not applying any of the new concepts and and that's like something that frustrates me inherently, but I did not get that with you. I got you as somebody who was like really trying to push that edge and knew the importance of what natural movement brought in the rehab setting. And it was it was great to meet you and I and your whole staff too. your whole team was lovely and incredible and you were so helpful that entire time. So when the opportunity for Moven 2026 came by, uh I spoke with Phil Lombardo and you know I told him who I thought would be a perfect fit and he agreed with me. You know it was you and then he also uh Ryan who's not on this call today but Ryan who was on the call yesterday. So that's my introduction and you can go ahead and take it away in case you want to add some stuff that uh

[02:45] anybody else might not know about you. Yeah. Well, first off, I appreciate those kind words, Brian, and and uh it was great to have you here. I I love meeting people that are fired up. Like, you're fired up and we we my whole team really loved you, which which was pretty cool. And just being fired up about it. Me, to me, movement is fun. Movement is cool. Movement is fun. Um it's exciting to be in it, you know, and and you know, it's kind of uh interesting and I you know, I would agree with you. Um I you know I think the where the research has gone over my career is very established how important just movement is just movement in general but also how important quality movement is there's a qualitative part to movement that is just absolutely critical and and you know and and but I would also say do does that mean we always do a great job of coaching it teaching it you know making it a permanent change I think that's one of the really difficult things because I don't think it's easy to change I mean you can change

[03:47] someone's posture and and and how they move changing alignment will immediately change how someone moves and but trying to make everybody has habits right so the habits in terms of how they move will dictate what kind of impairments they have what kind of physical issues whether they stress something or they don't you can change their body alignment and immediately change how they move but I think the tricky part is getting to actually making it a permanent change. And I think that's tricky. I think I you know I think it's hard. Um I don't think it's easy. I think you need skills like that we talk about. And you know I I don't honestly I don't know any other way uh to go about changing how someone moves than to deal with natural movement and deal with neurodedevelopmental sequence and like I just don't know how you do it. Like there I don't think there's a better way to do it. Um, I don't always profess to, you know, I think we can all be better at it. I don't care how good you are at it. I think we can all get better at it.

[04:49] We can get better at living it. We can get better at teaching it and all those things. Uh, and I think it's wonderful. I I get excited when someone gets excited about something like our functional fitness gym. Like I I that was something that our team had fun creating. And and yeah, look, we we live we we don't lift weights in real life, like you pick up mulch, you you carry it, you move it somewhere else, you spread it out. That's a that's a being able to get in different positions. And that's um balance and there's that's a dynamic part to it is it's movement skill. It's it's functional strength, which you know it everything gets called functional strength, which >> Yeah. Yeah. Everything from here to the moon is is is functional. You know, >> everything is. >> You're 100% right. I I see that's one thing I love about your attitude. It's like you're never somebody who thinks they know everything, right? Like perfection is one of the biggest mentors of my life taught me that perfection is the enemy of progress. And I realized that the moment you think you know everything, you become complacent and

[05:50] you're not moving in the direction you need to move. >> And I'm glad to be surrounded by a bunch of people who are constantly questioning, trying to evolve, and trying to build something fresh. The second thing you said was was a really good point too, which was, you know, it's hard. I can change, you know, what's happening now, but it's hard to keep that change long lasting. You're 100% right. If you see somebody once a week for an hour, you cannot dictate what they're doing the rest of the week. You know, 8 hours a day sitting slunged over, not taking any movement, snacks, not not involving any movement in your life, and you decide, okay, you know what? I'm I'm going to improve my life by moving once a week. You're right. You are improving your life by at least moving once a week. But there's still a lot of room to improve, right? There's room for improvement and and you're absolutely right in that it's not an easy thing. But like you said, the best way to do it is through natural move because it's a contextually based rich kind of thing. One one thing I've learned and and from from reading research and and being in the the profession that we're in is you don't learn something unless there's

[06:51] consequence, right? And that goes back to you being a kid and maybe your mom's smacking you in the butt if you didn't behave. But it's also it's also a very real thing with movement. I mean, if you look at parkour athletes who fail often and fail all the time, they're probably highly skilled movers. As long as it wasn't like a debilitating injury that ended their career, but some of these guys have some crazy injuries, but look at the things that they're able to accomplish. And it's because, you know, their first jump was from here to here and they failed this a bunch of times which then led to successes which now you see these people clearing, you know, 25 ft here to here to catch a pole to slide down. And it's because they they understood through all of their failures which were instant feedback and all their successes which is instant feedback. You know, when you run, jump, and you get that first landing and your body's successful, it knows, oh, I got to put that bad boy down long term, right? When we talk about like motor plans and motor development and when you look at research with ecological dynamics, there's some things that are conflicting, but I think both things

[07:52] operate in tandem. I don't think they're exclusive. When you talk about the development of skill, interaction with your environment, I think, is going to be the biggest provider of allowing you to be successful. But I think there's definitely research that shows when you sleep that lymphatic system kind of picks up and and with all that stuff, this kind of leads to what MoveNet Medical in 2026 is going to look like. And me and you have had some discussions and we can talk about I I I want to again clear out and say that I think Phil and the original team did a great job bringing the foundation into place of what Moen Medical would be, but me and you had our discussions on what we think the shortcomings are and a vision for a MoveNet 2.0 and a Moen Medical 2.0. No, that's just not going to cut it, right? It's not where it needs to be in terms. So, you know, uh what are your what are your thoughts on that and and I'll give you my thoughts of where I thought it fell short after you go and then we could talk about ways we're thinking about improving it. >> Yeah, first off, I appreciate that question. Um so, so first off, I I think Mugnat Medical has potential to be a world-class course and I want to see it

[08:54] go there. Uh more importantly, I think it is also just needed. Uh and I think there's a lot of space for you know there's a lot of space for using movement diagnostically um in your exam diagnostically but also for through the treatment progression um but also in the retraining of of movement uh whether it be for an injury or you know impairment injury based if you're in the physical therapy space or whether you're more like in the lines of fitness. It no matter who you are and where you are on that continuum. It's about physical capability. Uh and that can't be done without really being good at at movement. So what what I would like to see happen is I would love to see everybody come in with a base of understanding of of what nerd developmental sequence looks like, what the movements look like. I think I think Munenat has just done an absolutely spectacular job at at communicating the

[09:58] importance of movement and putting it into something that is understandable. I would love to see everybody the the the practitioners come in with understanding of that on a level so that when we hit we can start talking right away about okay how do you look at this? How do you evaluate this? How do you use this structure and this framework to work on manual corrective work to speed up the process? Here's how you do the corrective part. This is how you do progression. So, I would love to see it get to where it is more applicationbased. Um, when I think about how I I learn and I I can only speak for myself, but I learn very well by examples. I love to see what some how someone sequences exercises, how they go from this to that, like how do you get it? And everybody gets funneled into it with different levels of understanding and everybody gets different exposures to how they were taught in regards to doing things.

[10:58] >> Um, sometimes it's very impairment based and you pick this exercise to correct that. >> I you can do that and you can apply the framework to that very very well. It works great. But I also think it's important to get the bigger context of movement in general and that we don't necessarily move in isol. So I'm I'm excited about going to that. I'm excited to getting into deeper levels of conversation. Um I also would love to see okay regardless of what the impairment what what mean the diagnosis like I think talking about some diagnosises are is important. Um, but whether they come in with stenosis or spondyloesis or a knee injury or whatever it is, it's all based in movement as to why it's there to start with and to help people use the framework to address common things you see with these different diagnosis problems. So that we're now we're having an advanced conversation about how to apply the framework, how to use it in

[11:59] manual therapy, how to how to take it all the way through to fitness, uh, and ultimately help things to stick at whatever, you know, so that they really do get where they move well, whether it's the weekend athlete, middle-aged, older person just trying to hike, walk around their community to someone who's that parkour person or somebody who's high level. Yeah, >> I think there's a lot of conversations that can be had and a lot of depth that can be had and I I'm excited about that part. I'm I'm excited to working with people that are fired up like yourself and everybody that I've had that I've seen in the Moen community um cares about. They're all trying to get better and I 100% >> that's cool. Those are the kind of people I like to hang out with. Uh and so I'm excited to work kind of in a team and and do my best to try to make it into something that is world class. Um and I think there's some components to do that. So >> yeah, one one thing I definitely know about you, you don't half do anything. Um, I will say that what you just mentioned was great. You know, everybody has their own recipe to make the same thing, right? Everybody's got an apple

[13:00] pie recipe that they swear by. And and that just comes through the experiences and what we're exposed to and what we learn. And I agree with you. You know, I I want to see more direct application where where where MoveNet Medical was was an excellent course for me when I took it. But you know, hindsight 2020, you think back on it and I'm I was already level two certified and like we talked about that first day is just move that L1 light, right? Yes. >> So the two ways that we're trying to address that is put that L1 light virtual in advance and you can understand and already get those concepts prior to you even getting to move medical, which is kind of like the standard normity of any certification anybody does, right? there's like a virtual implementation of the foundational principles prior to you even arriving to the spot. So I want to take moving that into the future, right? So we can have that. And then the second thing was um what you were talking about. So uh well I'm sorry. A second thing I was thinking about was also just bundling a level one and movement medical. Right. So you have

[14:02] like a 4-day event where if you show up a little bit in advance, you're going to do your two days of L1. You knock out your L1. Now you fully got it. It's super fresh in your mind. And then you can go right into move medical and do two days instead of there being an L1 L2 option having that L1 move medical combo which I think for anybody who's not move certified they can just hop on on that really get the depth depth of the concept and and be certified and then run into movement medical and use that to enhance their practice which makes a lot of sense because generally speaking the majority of the movements you're going to be utilizing with clients that are in a rehabilitatory setting are going to be the level one kind of positions because it's like ground work lifting carrying ing you know the basic levels of hanging. I remember when we did move medical in your location, we were popping in and out and one of the case studies was like shoulder impingement, right? >> And prior to experience, prior to experiencing move medical, everything related to a shoulder impingement, you know, if you looked at it from a traditional physical therapy lens, was treated a very, very specific way. And

[15:04] up until I got to move medical, 100% of the time that I'd seen it, I had never seen anybody use a dead hang to treat shoulder impingement. And that's one of the things we talked about, right, was using a dead hang to help clear space. And it was something like somebody was like, "Hey, 90% of shoulder impingements, you could probably just use a a a dead hang to start creating space in that that AC joint in that region." And then you guys talked about how you can enhance it through the actual physical therapist practice. So, um, another thing that kind of felt a little shy for me was as an exercise physiologist, I don't do any manual techniques. that's not in my not in my scope, not in my field. It's rampant in the industry. You know, we I think that's that's a a completely different discussion. But there's a lot of strength coaches and uh exercise professionals or certified personal trainers that operate in the guise of I'm a physical therapist, right? They don't have a degree in physical therapy. They're not a doctor in physical therapy. They just saw some cool stuff online and next thing you know, they're grasping their clients. They're needling their clients. They're just doing a

[16:04] bunch. And and and Miami is the wild wild west for that. It's pretty wild, but you know, it would be really interesting to put non-manual techniques into the movement medical because like for instance, I I did a PRI course years ago with uh not directly with Ron Heresca, but one of one of uh the guys that I think it was Stephen Anderson or something like that that was teaching the course and they taught both. They taught manual techniques for the physical therapist and they taught non-manual techniques for allied health professionals, right? So I I would love to see that also implemented into the future as we we kind of move in that direction. So that's where you know move that kind of fell short and then that's exactly how we're going to try and address it right get rid of that first day move that light day and just like you said go in already cooking you know come in let's already start to apply this let's see where everybody's at conceptually and have the dynamic conversation about what has been taught because what's beautiful about being in an environment like this is that there's always an opportunity to learn from the person next to you or the person across

[17:06] from you cuz there might be something there during that dynamic discussion that somebody brings up in their own personal practice that you go, "Oh man, that's genius. I didn't think of that. Now I can implement that." And it gives you a new skill set right off the bat. And there was a lot of that in the original movement medical cuz we had osteopaths that took the course, we had physical therapists, we had chiropractors, we had movement professionals. So it was really cool. So definitely excited about those uh improvements. And then obviously enhancing the manual is something that we discussed. >> Yeah. No, I agree with you and and I think the exciting thing about it and one of the reasons I'm excited about it is just, you know, is just getting a chance to learn from each other and and having different perspectives because I think creating the space for those kinds of conversations. Um, we do it in our team all the time. It's like, all right, here's the we see these all the time across the board. We see stiff ankles, we see stiff hips, we see this, this, this, and this. Like, doesn't matter what they're coming with, but you have to solve these problems. How would you do it? How would you do it? and then and then talking through whether it be

[18:06] hands-on stuff, whether it be here's your your favorite ways to progress, whatever that looks like. Um, plus plus it it all comes down to movement. Like I I'm not arrogant enough to think that anything I do with my hands is the thing that really changes somebody long term. I think you you it's a reset and it helps someone to feel different in the moment and feel that it can change. It really is. It establishes trust is what it really does. And then hopefully you'll listen to me now about what really needs to be done and what really needs to happen because >> you can do something help someone gain motion or do whatever. But then if they go out of your office and then do you you alluded to it earlier, all the other hours of the day right back to whatever your movement habit is, well then you just reinforce the movement habit they created in the first place. And so you have to get to those things. And I think those are the fun conversations and those are the those are the those are the good exchange conversations and the

[19:06] different there's lots of ways to get to a really great outcome. That's one of the beauties. I mean I think one of the nice things is is is learning from each other and then and then you know trying to figure out whatever puzzle piece you got to get put together to help that person understand it to make the difference. And that's where I really hope the move medical goes. that's where I hope to help help push it to. Um, you know, I think that that exchange is is is a lot of fun. So, it's going to be cool to see where it goes. >> Yeah, I'm I'm definitely excited for it to address a lot of that. I know they went into, you know, some some detail regarding pain science and the original women medical and it just reminded me of something that actually occurred today. So, we had a lady that came into the facility today and the exercise was just a hip hinch, a dead lift with a kettle bell, 12 kilo kettle bell, nothing heavy, 26 lbs. This is a a female who used to play softball, so she's kind of athletic, >> but apparently she had met somebody before who told her Yeah. Oh, her her dad her father or her friend's father had a pretty debilitating back injury.

[20:08] >> Sure. >> And they told him, "Don't don't hinge at the hip ever again. You know, you're going to blow out your back. You're going to, you know, like doom doom sequencing." you know, just like this is this is like like taking an entire movement category and saying it's completely off limits for the rest of your life and you're never going to be able to use it again. So, she came in with this idea of, "Oh, I I can't do the deadlift. It's it's unsafe." Boom. Boom boom boom boom. And so, you know, we kind of looked at him. We're like, "Okay, so what's going on?" We we we had the conversation about it and I said, "Hey, look, if you feel really uncomfortable, we can do is start from a half kneel and do a half kneel hip hinge pattern so you can kind of integrate it and see that it's perfectly safe." and then teaching all the other mechanics that are related to it, right? Like bracing and all this stuff. Long story short, she did it and then she was like, "Oh yeah, that felt, you know, I felt like my hamstrings were working and not my back at all." Like I felt great. And I was like, "Yeah, you're you're not made of glass. You're not going to break." And that that unfortunately is the one of the hardest things to overcome is somebody who's experienced an injury that has set them in such a

[21:11] fear place where they're so alert and so bound up and so tight. And what you alluded to, you know, sometimes you got to put your hands on somebody to establish some trust or to give them something that's like a lowanging fruit where they they feel some sense of relief. >> But going back, if you don't integrate, if you don't fix, if you don't apply the the correct environment and movement strategy to establish the appropriate behavior so that that doesn't come back again, then there's only so much you can do. And I'm hoping that and I know that when we start revitalizing MoveNet uh medical and getting that 2.0 manual out and the course out, I think we're going to design something that like you said is world class and something that's incredibly special because it's not complicated. You know, the unfortunate reality is you go on the internet and it's like, yeah, the only way you're going to fix it is if you tie a band around your left leg, breathe through your left nostril, put a balloon on this side, flex your abs, and eat a steak. And you're like, >> "What? Like what? It's not rocket

[22:11] science, right? Like it's this is and and I think that's also the the kind of like negative view that people have with just natural movement. It's not fancy enough, right? It's it's >> it's like, oh wait, you mean to tell me that I can solve my problem by just doing a normal completely natural movement that human beings have been evol evolutionarily doing since the beginning of time? That doesn't make any sense." >> Yeah. >> It's like what? >> Yeah. >> You know. >> Yeah. Yeah. No, I think you're absolutely right and and people's experiences, good, bad, or medium, certainly come to the present and affect your thought process and your inflammatory response and what you feel in the moment. And then trying to give people a different sensory experience, different beliefs, you know, maybe, but you can't always attack those right away. It's got to be getting them to feel some things that are different. And you know, you know this, you can't learn to move without moving. So, >> 100% 100%. Now, I know that we're approaching the end of our call because the time and you probably need a little bit of time to get back in the clinic, but I truly appreciate you. I know we're supposed to do this yesterday for taking the time today to allow me to introduce

[23:13] you back into the MoNet community and to the the community as a whole. Let them know what's coming up. Uh like I told them, the goal is to have MoveNet Medical in 2026, probably the tail end of 2026. We're if if we're everything kind of clicks in place and me and Ryan get some stuff in place and me and you were able to get some place. I know you have a lot of things on your plate. We'll be maybe the first 6 months tail end figure month four, month five, month six, we'll try and get our first move that medical course out live and then in the tail end offer it again. And you know depending on where it is, we're going to get it. But the goal is move that medical 2026 making its comeback and it'll be moved medical 2.0 and this man right here is going to help lead the charge along with Ryan and myself. So I'm excited for that. >> Yeah. Okay. Well, delighted to be a part of it. I'm excited to see where we where we take it and and make it into something as good as we can make it. >> Take care. Have a good one. >> Good talk to you, man. >> Good talking to you.
