TITLE: Ayurveda Based Diet & Life Style Guidelines for Prevention and Management of Skin Diseases
AUTHOR: Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-15
PAGE COUNT: 48
======================================================================

[p.1] Ayurveda based diet & life Style Guidelines 
for Prevention and Management of Skin Diseases
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India 
New Delhi

[p.2] © Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India, New Delhi - 110058
Publisher: Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH, Government of 
India, New Delhi, J. L. N. B. C. A. H. Anusandhan Bhavan, 61-65, Institutional Area, Opp. D-Block, 
Janakpuri, New Delhi - 110 058, E-mail: dg-ccras@nic.in, Website : www.ccras.nic.in
Disclaimer: All possible efforts have been made to ensure the correctness of the contents. However 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH, shall not be accountable for any 
inadvertent error in the content. Corrective measures shall be taken up once such errors are brought to 
notice.
Note: These are general guidelines & advocacies and should only be followed under supervision of qualified 
registered Ayurveda practicetioner.
ISBN: 978-93-83864-32-4

[p.3] Chief Editor
Prof. Vaidya K. S. Dhiman
DG, CCRAS
Executive Editor
Dr. N. Srikanth
DDG, CCRAS
Editor
Dr. B. C. S. Rao
Assistant Director, CCRAS
Content development
1. Dr. Babita Yadav, RO(Ay), CCRAS, Headquarters
2. Dr. Sophia Jameela, RO(Ay), CCRAS, Headquarters
Reviewer
Prof. P. Muralikrishna
PG Dept. of Panchakarma, S.V. Ayurvedic College, Tirupati
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES 
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India 
New Delhi

[p.4] Prologue
Ayurveda, the science of life, evolved from the quest of man to have a happy life, through a deep understanding 
of evolution, creation and its maintenance, perceived and conceived by the rishi’s of ancient India. The 
progressive establishment of scientific Ayurveda began in the Vedic period and has defined life as a manifestation 
of union of soul, mind and body those are integral and interdependent components of life. Ahara (wholesome 
food), nidra (Optimum sleep) and brahmacharya (selective Celibacy) has been given pivotal role in the 
maintenance of health. Along with diet, dinacharya and rtucharya has been given important role in the 
maintenance of disease. Ayurveda describes the wholesome and non-wholesome substances including diet, 
medicines etc. and has classified them into three major categories, viz, Shamana (palliative), Kopana 
(aggravating) and Swastha Hita (conducive to health).
Human body develops by assimilating nutrients from food. Wholesome food is the cause for excellence in 
health and unwholesome is responsible for disease. Ayurveda has developed the wisdom of dietetics on the 
basis of various natural perceptions at different levels of our sensorium. Ahara (wholesome food), Vihara 
(wholesome activities) and Aushadha (medicaments) form the cornerstone of palliative treatment.
Anatomy and physiology of skin has been dealt in detail by Ayurveda. The diseases of skin often mirror the 
in-equilibrium of dosha in the body as skin represents the substratum upon which the quality of ahararasa, 
which is obtained from Ahara, is depicted upon. The ICD-10 classification of human disease lists more than
1,000 skin or skin-related illnesses, a pattern dominated by a few conditions accounting for most of the skin 
disease burden. Despite this profound impact, skin disease continues to receive relatively little attention in the 
national or global health debate. Collectively, skin conditions were the 4th leading cause of nonfatal burden 
expressed as years lost due to disability in 2010.
Ayurveda has included skin diseases under the umbrella of Kushta and has pointed at its multifactorial 
etiology. Erroneous Diet and lifestyle have been implicated as chief factors for the onset, progression and 
recurrence of many skin diseases. They can prevent or alter the pathogenesis and affect the prognosis of 
skin diseases in a positive or negative manner.
The council has taken initiative to develop user friendly guidelines for prevention of common skin diseases 
through dietary and lifestyle advocacies based on authentic Ayurvedic commendations to meet the needs of 
this era. These guidelines are useful for health seekers and physicians alike.

[p.5] INDEX
S. No. Content Page No.
1. Background 1
2. Concept of Ahara (Diet) in Ayurveda 2
3. Ayurvedic dietary guidelines 2
4. Ahara vidhi visesha ayatana 3
5. Viruddha Ahara (Dietetic Incompatibility) 4
6. Concept of Vihara (Lifestyle) in Ayurveda 4
7. Dinacharya(Daily regimen) 4
8. Rithucharya(Seasonal regimen) 5
9. Sadvritta (Ethical Regimen): Rules of good conduct 5
10. Dharniya & Adharniyavega(Preventive Regimens) 6
11. Concept of skin diseases and its etiology 7
12. Food related factors 9
13. Concept of Samsargaja Roga in ayurveda 18
14. Pathogenesis of skin diseases 19
15. Poorvarupa (Prodromal Symptoms) 20
16. Kusta-Mahakusta- kshudrakusta 23
17. Common skin diseases mentioned in Ayurveda 24
18. General management of skin disorders 29
19. Pathya for kusta 34
20. Apathya for kusta 38
21. Conclusion 40
22. References 42

[p.7] Ayurveda based diet & life Style Guidelines/Intervention for Prevention and Management of Skin
Diseases
Background
Skin is the largest organ in the body and covers an area of approximately 1.4 to 2 M2. The skin protects the body 
from harmful agents such as ultraviolet light, chemical and infective organisms in the atmosphere. Skin also regulates 
body temperature, gathers sensory inputs from the environment, stores water, fat, and vitamin D, and plays a role in 
the immune system protecting from the disease. The epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin, and protects the 
body from the environment. The thickness of the epidermis varies in different types of skin; it is only .05 mm thick on 
the eyelids, and is 1.5 mm thick on the palms and the soles of the feet. The dermis is located beneath the epidermis 
and is the thickest of the three layers of the skin (1.5 to 4 mm thick), making up approximately 90 percent of the 
thickness of the skin. The main functions of the dermis are to regulate teFmperature and to supply the epidermis with 
nutrient-saturated blood. Much of the body’s water supply is stored within the dermis. This layer contains most of the 
skins’ specialized cells and structures, including lymphatic’s, blood vessels, sweat glands, sebaceous glands, collagen, 
elastin and nerve endings. The hypodermis (subcutaneous layer, or superficial fascia) lies between the dermis and 
underlying tissues and organs. It consists of mostly adipose tissue and is the storage site of most body fat.
Ayurveda explains twak as one among the 5 jnanendriya, attributed with the function of sensation of touch and is the 
location (ashray sthana) of sweat channels (swedavahi strotas) and hairs (loma). Susrutha and Bhavamishra'have 
opined that twak has 7 layers, while Vagbhatta and Charaka have described 6 layers of twak as tabulated below.
Table 1: 7 layers of Twak (skin) as explained by Ayurveda.
Name of different 
Layer
Width
(thickness)
Rogadhisthan 
(site of skin diseases)
Modern concept
Avabhasini/
Udakdhara
1/18 vrihi Sidhma, Padmakantaka Epithelial layer, horny 
layer, Stratum 
Corneum
Lohita/Asrugdhara 1/16 vrihi Tilkalak, Nyachchha, Vyang Stratum Lucidum
Shweta /tritiya 1/12 vrihi Ajagallika Charma dala Stratum granulosum
Tamra/ chaturtha 
Outer forth
1/8 vrihi Kushta, Kilasa Malphigian layer
Vedini/ panchami 1/5 vrihi Kushta,Visarpa Papillary layer
Rohini /shasthi 1 vrihi Apachi, Arbuda, Slipada, 
Galganda
Reticular layer
Mamsadhara 2 vrihi Bhagandar, Vidradhi, Arsh Sub cutaneous tissue, 
Muscular layer.
1

[p.8] In Ayurveda, the treatment is aimed at prevention of diseases (swasthavritta) and cure of already manifested diseases 
through judicious and logical use of ahara (dietetics), vihara (lifestyle and oushadha (medication and therapies). The 
rational Ayurveda therapy is provided through 4 fold steps involving samshamana (palliation), dosha sodhana (bio- 
cleansing procedures), nidana parivarjana (avoiding causative factors) and pathya (dietetics suitable for disease 
pacification). Lifestyle or daily regimen ofan individual is equally important while ascertaining the individual vulnerability 
to disease. Elaborate description is available on personal hygiene encompassing diet and regimen during daily routine 
(Dinacharya), seasonal routine (Ritucharya) and behavioral and ethical principles (Sadvritta). Observance of certain 
rules regarding suppressible and non-suppressible urges also is important for positive health.
The concept of Ahara
Every living and non-living beings in this universe is composed of five basic elements, the Pancha Mahabhootas, 
namely Earth (Prithvi), Water (Ap), Fire (Teja), Air (Vayu) and Ether (Akasha) the panchabhuta components of 
ingested food nourishes their respective tissue elements in the body. Ahara is the best of all medicines and is considered 
one among the three sub-pillars of Ayurveda (thrayo-upasthamba). The ahara (food) and vihara (lifestyle) which are 
congenial to the channels, constitution and strength of an individual is termed as pathya (wholesome) and that which 
is non-congenial is termed as apathya (unwholesome). The preventive and curative aspects of Ayurveda revolve 
around the central theme of pathya ahara and vihara. Ayurveda emphasizes basic dietary guidelines in terms of 
appropriate food, combinations of food, methods of cooking, storage, eating atmosphere, hygiene and etiquette 
(ashtavidha ahara vidhi visesha ayatana) 2
Ayurvedic dietary guidelines3:
1. Intake of food at in time (Kale bhojana).
2. Food intake as per suitability (satmya bhojana)
3. Food intake as per the prakruthi of individual (hita bhojan)
4. Proper hygiene ( suchi bhojan)
5. Intake of food which is unctuous (snigdha bhojan)
6. Intake of food which is warm (ushna bhojan)
7. Intake of food which is easy to digest (Laghu bhojan)
8. Eat while there is in interest to food and while eating concentrate on food and the process of eating (tan 
mana: bhojana)
9. Eat food with six taste components (sad-rasayukta ahara)
10. Food should be primarily sweet in nature (madhura praya)
11. Food should be ingested calmly, neither too slow nor too fast (na ati druta vilambita)
12. After bathing (snatah)
13. Food intake only when there is sufficient hunger (kshudvan)
14. Proper washing of hand, feet and face should be done before food intake (dhauta pada-kara-anana:)
15. After offering prayers and paying obeisance to gods and forefathers (pithru -deva tarpana)
16. After offering food to guests, teachers and chidren ( athithi- balakaguru tarpana)
17. Without disgracing food (anindan bhunjaana)
18. Silently (moun)
2

[p.9] Ahara matra (quantity of food)
The food and nutritional requirement varies from person to person and depends upon the status of agni, sharira 
prakriti, age etc. Susruta and Vagbhata have suggested that if stomach capacity is hypothetically divided into 4 
parts on the basis of its filling , one should take 2 parts of solid food, 1 part of liquid food and 1 part should be 
left empty for easy movement of Vata4.
Sequence of food intake
Guru, madhura and snigdha food should be taken initially during the course of a meal followed by amla, lavana 
ahara. Food which is ruksha, katu, tikta and kashaya should be taken in the last part of the meal for proper 
activation of agni, proper absorption and assimilation of food. After taking food, it is advised to take rest for 
muhurta matra (48 minutes)5 for proper digestion.
Ahara vidhi viseshaayatana
To receive the total benefits of Ahara it is also necessary to have the knowledge about” Ashta ahara 
vidhivisheshaayatana”.they are
1. Prakriti-food should be taken considering the nature of food, such as guru (Heavy food like 
milk, flesh), laghu (food like green gram etc which are light to digest) , seeta (food which are 
cold in potency such as milk) , ushna (food which are of hot potency like spicy food), ruksha 
(dry ness inducing food), snigda( unctuous food such as ghee, butter) and their impact on agni .
2. Karana- It refers to modification in the food property by action of agni, water etc. dadhi is a 
substance which is prohibited to be used after heating.
3. Samyoga- it denotes the combinations of food which either augment or nullify the actions of the 
individual components.
4. Raashi-this represents the quantum of food required to each person
5. Desha-The dynamics and kinetics of the food consumed is dependent on the habitat of the 
individual and also the area from where the substance has originated.
6. Kaala- this represents time in terms of climate, phase of digestion, timing of the day, Stage 
(avastha) of disease etc.
7. Upayoga Samstha-food should be taken as per the rules of dietetics.
8. Upayokta-It denotes the consumer of the food. Food intake should be guided by the personal 
preference and okasatmya (habitual homologation) of each individual.
3

[p.10] Virudha ahara6 (Dietetic Incompatibility)
In Ayurveda, the concept of virudhahara is very much pivotal in the pathogenesis of the disease. Acharya Charaka 
defines virudhahara as certain diet and its combinations, which interrupts the metabolism, which inhibits the process 
of formation of tissue and which have opposite property to that of the tissue are called as ViruddhaAnna or 
incompatible diet7. Virudha can be considered as diet which are having mutually contradictory properties, 
contradictory to tissues, diet capable of producing untoward effect on the body when processed in a particular 
form or proportion or those food which may produce an unwanted effect when taken at an inappropriate time. 
Ayurvedic literature has compiled almost 18 types of virudha ahara and has also mentioned complications ranging 
from skin diseases (kushta), visarpa (erysipelas), unmada (insanity) and marana (death).
Concept of Vihara (Lifestyle) in Ayurveda
The description about Dinacharya, Rtucharya, Sadvrtta and Nidra in Ayurveda clearly depicts the importance of 
a healthy regimen in the prevention and management of many diseases. A growing body of scientific evidence has 
demonstrated that lifestyle intervention is an essential component in the treatment of chronic disease that can be as 
effective as medication but considered to be safe without risks and side effects8 . A lifestyle is a characteristic 
bundle of behaviours that makes sense to both others and oneself in a given time and place, including social 
relations consumption, entertainment and dress9 .
Dinacharya (Daily regimen)
Ayurveda promotes a lifestyle that’s in harmony with nature
• It is advisable to wake up during Brahma Muhurta (preferably between 4.00 a.m. to 5.30 a.m.).
• Drinking water early in the morning according to one’s capacity cleanses the body by enhancing the 
elimination of toxic wastes.
• One should attend the nature’s calls.
• The soft brushes made out of twigs of Khadira, Karanja, Apamarga etc. Tongue should be cleaned by 
a long flexible strip of metal or plant twig. It not only cleanses the tongue but also stimulates appetite and 
digestion. Mouth should also be cleaned properly.
• Eyes should be cleaned with fresh water to prevent eye diseases and promote vision. Also wash eyes with 
Triphala Phanta every day.
• Chewing ofbetel leaves with small pieces of Areca nut (kramuka) and fragrant substances like cardamom, 
cloves, refreshes the mouth and enhance digestion.
• It is necessary to massage whole body with oil every day. Oil massage ensures softness and unctuousness 
of skin, free movement ofjoints and muscles, peripheral circulation and elimination of metabolic wastes.
• Regular exercise is essential for perfect health. It builds up stamina and resistance against disease, clears 
the channels of body (Srotas) and increases the blood circulation. It enhances efficiency of body organs, 
promotes appetite and digestion and prevents obesity.
• Bathing improves enthusiasm, strength, sexual vigour, appetite, span of life and removes sweat and other 
impurities from the body. After bath one should wear clean clothes and smear the body with perfume. 
One should have regular shaving, haircut, cutting of nails etc.
4

[p.11] • Person should avoid extra marital sexual relationship and sexual intercourse with a woman during her 
menses, pregnancy, within one and half month after delivery, devoid of passion, older than one and 
suffering from disease.
Ritucharya (Seasonal regimen)
In Ayurvedic classics, there has been a thorough consideration for seasons, besides the dietetic regimens for days 
and nights. Whole year is divided into six seasons and detailed dietetic regimen for these seasons is prescribed. In 
spring season, bitter, hot and astringent diet is advised while salty, sour and sweet food should be avoided. 
Wheat, barley, honey syrup, fruits like mango, jack fruit-etc. and meat of forest animals is advised. In summer 
season due to hot climate aggravation ofpitta occurs. Hence pitta pacifying cold, liquid, sweet and oily diet is 
advised. Excessive hot, spicy, sour salty diet should be avoided. Intake of rice, milk, ghee, sugar, grapes, coconut 
water, meat of forest animals are advised. In rainy season aggravation of vata occurs, hence vata shamaka 
sweet, sour and salty food and drinks are preferred. The food should be hot, dry, fatty and easily digestible. 
Preserved rice, wheat, barley and mutton soups are advised. In pre winter and winter season Vatadosha aggravates 
due to cold, dry, chily atmosphere hence vataghna, pittavardhaka diet is recommended. Hot, sweet, sour and 
salty food, milk, sugarcane, rice, oils and fats are advised and in autumn season aggravation of Pitta dosha 
occurs. Therefore, it is ideal to take ghee processed with bitter drugs; purgation, bloodletting, coolant, and light 
diet are advised. Diets dominant in Bitter, sweet, pungent diets are advised.
Sadvritta (Ethical Regimen): Rules of good conduct
Ayurveda prescribes certain rules for maintaining healthy mind. These are principles of right conduct that are 
applicable to all people at all times and places. Practicing them gives balance and harmony to the mind. These are
• Always speak the truth.
• Do not lose your temper under any circumstances.
• Do not get addicted to sensory pleasures.
• Do not harm anyone.
• As far as possible, do not expose yourself to hardships.
• Try to control your passions.
• Endeavor to speak pleasant and sweet words.
• Meditate every day for tranquility of mind.
• Observe cleanliness in all things.
• Be patient.
• Observe self-control.
• Try to distribute knowledge, good advice and help to others.
• Whenever possible, devote your services to God, to the wise and to respectable or elderly individuals.
• Be straightforward and kind.
• Avoid irregularity in daily activities.
5

[p.12] • Avoid over eating, overdrinking, too much sexual activity, too much or too little sleep.
• Behave according to the time and place where you are residing.
• Act always in a courteous and polite manner.
• Control your sense organs.
• Make a habit of doing all that is good and avoiding all that is bad.
Dharniya & Adharniyavega (Preventive Regimens)
Observations of certain prescriptions and prohibitions given by Ayurveda ensure physical, mental and spiritual
well-being.
Non-Suppressible Urges
There are thirteen natural urges. Suppression of which leads to many diseases as given below:
• Suppression of urge for urination leads to difficulty in passing urine, urinary stone, atony of bladder and 
inflammation ofurinary tract.
• Suppression of urge for passing stool leads to pain in abdomen, indigestion, gas in abdomen, headache.
• Suppression of flatus leads to pain in abdomen, indigestion, heart diseases, constipation or diarrhea.
• Suppression of ejaculation of semen may produce a stone (Spermato-lith), pain in testis and difficulty in 
intercourse.
• Suppression ofvomiting produces different types ofdiseases like urticaria, giddiness, anaemia, hyperacidity, 
skin diseases and fever.
• Suppression of sneezing may produce rhinitis and chronic cold, headache, sinusitis and diseases of 
respiratory system.
• Suppression of eructation leads to hiccough, pain in chest, cough and loss of appetite.
• Suppression of yawning leads to diseases of the eyes, throat, ear and nose.
• Suppression of hunger and thirst may lead to nutritional disorders and debility.
• Suppression of tears leads to mental disorders, pain in chest, giddiness and digestive disorders.
• Suppression of exertion induced respiration may cause suffocation, respiratory disorders, heart diseases 
and even death.
• Suppression of sleep causes the diseases like insomnia, mental disorders, digestive disorders and diseases 
of sense organs.
6

[p.13] Suppressible Urges
One should suppress urges of greed, grief, fear, fury, pride, shamelessness, envy and excessive passion. 
Observe self-control and always speak truth. One should not harm others and should always act in a courteous 
and polite manner.
• Dietetic and behavioural bad habits should be given up and good things should be taken up gradually. An 
intelligent person who seeks happiness should make a great effort to make good company and avoid the 
bad one.
Concept of skin diseases and its Etiology
Skin is given due importance since time immemorial owing to the aesthetic value conferred upon skin, complexion 
and beauty by the society. Ayurveda has given prime importance to ahara and vihara in the maintenance of health 
and prevention of diseases. In the recent past the relation between diet and skin ailments is well established in 
contemporary medicine. Ayurvedic literature has described skin diseases mainly under the spectrum of kushta, 
the literary meaning of which is that which cause disfiguration.
Ayurvedic system of medicine describes a wide range of etiological factors for dermatological disorders. The 
etiological factors include physical, physiological, psychological, psychosocial, hereditary and Papakarma (sinful 
activities), based on the proximity of causes which are reclassified into sannikrishta (proximal cause) and viprakrishta 
(remote cause) nidana
Sannikrista Nidana (real causative factor) - Three Doshas viz. Vata, Pitta and Kapha and four Dushyas viz. 
Tvak (Rasa), Rakta, Mansa and Ambu or Lasika involved in the pathogenesis of skin diseases. These seven can 
be considered as sannikrishta nidana in kushta.
Viprakrista Nidana - These etiological factors are not involved directly in the pathogenesis, but they increase the 
disease proneness sensitize the body to the actual causative factors (Sannikrishta Nidana), Viprakusta nidana 
which include kulaja factors and janmottara kalaja (ahara, vihara and manasika factors).
Janmottarakalaja: The etiological factors in present life can be categorizes into three groups, Aharaja 
(diet & dietetic patterns), Viharaja (lifestyle related) and Manasika (psychological).
Kulaja Nidana: kushta is an adibalapravrtta roga which is said to arise from the day of conception by 
conjugation of sukra and artava with bijabhaga avayava dushti10. Ill effect is thought to be transmigrated 
from past lives (Poorva Janmakrata)
According to Sushruta if the person suffered from Kushtha in his previous life and if he takes rebirth then he 
develops Kushtha in his present life also Papakarma (sinful activities) has also been implicated in the etiology of 
kushta and is also said as a samsargja vyadhi (communicable disease). The Kushtha is generally described as 
Tridoshaja Vyadhi but type of the Kushtha ascertained upon the predominance of particular Dosha and is generally 
classified into mahakushta and ksudra kushta.
7

[p.14] Nidana or the etiological factors closely linked with the manifestation, transmission and progression 
of the disease are broadly classified in the classical Ayurveda texts in the following categories:
1. Aharaja nidana- food related causes
2. Viharaja Nidana- regimen related causes
3. Manasika Nidana- psychological causes.
4. Visesha Nidana- an etiology that is not common in all diseases, but specifically act as hetu in this 
disease.
5. Sahaja Nidana - those factors which causes disease due to beeja bhaga avayava dushti.
Thus the etiological factors of skin disorders may be related to food, life style and psychological 
factors.
8

[p.15] Food Related Factors (Aharaja nidana)
Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
Atilavana (excessive 
intake of Salt)
Salt predominant foods like pickles, 
bhelpuri, papad, chips, namkeen used 
in excess quantity
Atiamla ( eaxcessive 
intake of Sour foods)
Fermented products, pickles, bhelpuri, 
sour fruit juices, sauces like tomato 
sauce, excess intake of preserved foods, 
curd, buttermilk, lemon juice, vinegar, 
alcohol, sauce, squashes.
Virudhahara (Incom­
patible foods)
Sprouted vegetables/grains with meat, 
milk with meat, honey with meat, black 
gram with meat, lotus stem with meat, 
radish with meat, jaggery with meat, 
milk or honey with leafy vegetables, 
curd with chicken, honey heated in any 
form or taken with hot water, alcohol 
with kheer, fish with jaggery or sugar,
C w 4
D
/ i
9

[p.16] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
Guru annapana (Hard 
to digest foods)
Pizza, cheese mixed foods, bakery 
products, kidney beans, paneer etc, 
food items prepared mainly from 
black gram such as dosa, idli, vada; 
beef, pork; food prepared from 
flour.Regular intake of meat products 
Intake of milk shakes, kheer etc.
•
SnigdhaAnnapana 
(oily/unctuous foods)
Excessively oily foods such as 
biriyani, fried oily foods, meat 
soups, sweets made of excess ghee, 
milk etc such as kheer
1 1 ' , , ' :
Ati dravapana 
(excessive intake of 
liquid foods)
Drinking excess quantity of water/ 
juices/madya/ soft drinks/ milk / liquid 
foods like rasam/sambhar more than 
needed for the body
m ■
l i V 1 i
Sneha ati sevanam 
(excessive consump­
tion of oil and fats
Excessive intake of ghee for medical 
purposes or as part of diet.
Asatmya ahara (Un­
congenial foods)
Foods which are not suitable to 
prakriti, Desa (native to the place) 
such as fruits of foreign origin, eat­
ing food which is not native to the area 
such as Chinese food, pasta or pizza, 
soybean etc
J I k
^ r
h u / A
10

[p.17] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
Ajeernahara Intake of food before the previous 
food is properly digested
Chilichima cha payasa Intake of Chilichima (a variety of fish) 
in combination with milk.
Gramya - anupa 
audaka mamsa with 
milk (domestic, 
marshy animal meat 
with milk)
Non vegetarian food with milk, ice 
cream along with non-vegetarian 
food, milk products with meat eg. 
Dishes like butter chicken
11

[p.18] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
Seeta- ushna ahara 
kramam muktva 
sevanam
Intake of cold and hot food together 
or intake of cold food soon after 
intake of hot food or vice versa
Ajeerne madhu- 
phanita-matsya- 
lakucha
Habit of taking honey/jaggery/fish/ 
artocarpus lakucha/ radish/solanum 
nigrum etc in excessive quantity and 
especially when previous food has not 
been properly digested.
/
12

[p.19] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
Dadhi Curd in different forms such as raita, 
lassi, dahivada, mixed in curry etc 
especially after heating and in autumn, 
and spring seasons
Fish Excessive intake of fish or 
combination of fish with milk is said 
as an aetiology for skin diseases.
-
Masha Use of black gram and its prepara­
tions such as vada, dosa etc in 
excess
H i *
Mulaka regular usage of radish is said as a 
cause and precipitant of skin diseases
13

[p.20] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
Pishtanna Food prepared after pounding rice, 
gram etc and preparations such as 
Dosa, , vada, dhokla, etc
Tila R egular and excessive use of 
substances prepared from sesame
guda Regular usage ofjaggery and products 
made from jaggery
Ati madyapana Excessive usage of alcoholic 
preparations is said as a cause of 
visarpa(erysipelas) and such 
conditions.
14

[p.21] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting pms |

Excessive intake of green leafy
vegetables and pungent foods which
cause burning sensation.

harita saka and vidahi

anna

Excessive use of garlic is a cause
for visarpa(erysipelas) and such
inflammatory conditions.

praklinna anna Putrefied food

[p.22] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
kurchika, kilata excessive use of dairy products in the 
form of paneer etc are considered 
cause of inflammatory skin disorders
gramya - anupa 
oudaka mamsa
Frequent eating of flesh of domesti­
cated, marsh dwelling and aquatic 
animals.
vamana vega rodha suppressing the urge of Vomiting
16

[p.23] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
Pancha karmapachara Irregular and or improper practice 
of Panchakarma procedures
Bhaya -srama- 
santapopahatasya 
seetodaka sevanam
Entering into cold water/ drinking 
cold water immediately after one is 
afflicted with fear, exhaustion and 
grief
day sleep. Habit of regularly indulging in day 
sleep other than greeshma 
ritu(summer)
vega dharana Suppression of natural urges 
(Ref: Y.R.)
17

[p.24] Food articles Examples in contemporary setting Image
ananupurvya 
seetoshna vyatyasa 
seva
Non-compliance of the prescribed 
rules with regard to the order of 
restoring to hot and cold regimens 
i.e., sudden shifting from one extreme 
to another.(eg: exposing to hot 
weather directly from air conditioned 
areas)(Ref: Ca.Ni. - 5) 4
\
/
papakarma indulging in sinful acts
t 1
The concept of samsargaia roga in Ayurveda (communicable diseases)
Samsargaja roga are those diseases which spread through contact in the form of frequent physical contact, 
through exhaled air, by dining, sleeping or sitting together and sharing objects that has been handled by the 
patient. Skin diseases, fever, TB & conjunctivitis etc are examples of such diseases.
• Frequent physical contact with the affected person (including sexual contact)
18

[p.25] Through the exhaled air of patient (Airborne infection)
Dining, Sleeping and/or Sitting together
Sharing dress, ornaments and unguents (lotions, soaps,creams, oils and/or any 
other cosmetics)
Pathogenesis of Skin Diseases:-
Skin diseases often present and get triggered by multiple factors which are broadly classified as Aharaja, 
Viharaja, Manasika and Agantuka in nature which primarily initiate Agni Vaisamya and Raktadushti thus 
paves the way for deeper dhatu involvement. The three vitiated humours namely Vata, Pitta and Kapha in turn 
vitiate the skin, blood, muscle tissue and lymph. All these taken together, constitute the seven-fold pathogenic 
substances for the genesis of18 skin diseases i.e., seven major (Maha Kushta) and eleven minor (Khudra 
Kushta). All the seven factors are involved together in causing skin diseases, not in isolation of any one of these 
never cause this disease.
19

[p.26] Poorvarupa (Prodromal Symptoms):
Poorvarupa are the lakcanas which indicate the forthcoming disease.
Poorvarupa as per different Acharyas (Ca.Ni.5:7, Su. Ni .5, A.H.Su.14:11-12)
20

[p.27] Atisweda-excessive
perspiration

Kandu- itching all over
the body or any part of
the body

Tvak Parushya-
roughness of skin

Kshatavisarpanam-
increase in the size of
wounds (in spite of
treatment)

Ati Shlakshnata-
excessive smoothness

Asweda- lack of
perspiration

Romharsha/
Pariharsha-
horripilation

Angapradeshanam
Svapah - numbness of
body part

Asrujahkrishnnata-
blackness of blood

Vaivarnyam-
discolouration

[p.28] Suptangata-numbness Paridaha-burning
sensation
Kharata-coarsness
Iffl
Ushmayanam-hot
flushes
Gouravam -heaviness Recurrent attacks of 
svayathu and visarpa- 
frequent occurrence of 
oedema and acute 
spreading
Kayacchidrecuupadehah-
sticking of excreta in the 
body especially in 
orifices
Severe pain in any 
type of wound-
excessive pain in case of 
suppuration
22

[p.29] Kusta: Maha Kusta and Kshudra Kusta
MahaKusta: (Ca.Ci.7:13)
1. Kapala
2. Udumbara
3. Mandala
4. Rusyajihva
5. Pundarika
6. Sidhma
7. Kakanaka 
Kshudra Kusta: (Ca. Ci. 7:13)
1. Ekakusta
2. Carmakya
3. Kitibha
4. Vipadika
5. Alasaka
6. Dadru
7. Carmadala
8. Pama
9. Visphota
10. Sataru
11. Vicaracika
23

[p.30] Common skin diseases mentioned in Ayurveda
Kapala Kusta : The patches in the skin look like black and reddish 
pieces of Kapala (broken pieces of earthen pot). 
These patches are un-unctuous, rough and thick 
to touch; these are associated with excessive pain 
and this ailment is difficult to cure.
Udumbara Kusta Coppery coloured skin lesions associated with 
burning sensation, itching, pain and redness all 
around; with excessive pus/ blood discharge and 
resembling like a ripe fig fruit (Udumbara phala)
Mandala Kusta Skin condition characterised by circular elevated 
lesions which are mutually coalescing, with 
intense itching, with glossy or unctuous 
appearance
Rusyajihwa Kusta: Large circular patches which are rough, coarse, 
and dry resembling the tongue of rushya (a type 
of antelope) with reddish- blue tinge and intense 
burning sensation and pain
Pundarika Kusta White coloured skin lesion with reddish tinge in 
the edges, resembling the petals of lotus flower 
and associated with burning sensation, 
suppuration, and discharge.
24

[p.31] Sidhma Kusta Skin lesions resembling alabu pushpa 
(Lagenaria siceraria) with white colour and 
flaking of powdery skin on scratching
Kakana Kusta Skin lesions resembling gunja (Abrus 
precatorius) associated with severe burning 
sensation and intense pain.
Eka kusta Skin disease characterised by widespread 
lesions with lack of perspiration and fish scale 
like appearance
Carma Kusta Hard, coarse textured skin lesion resembling 
skin of elephant
Kitiba Kusta Hyperpigmented skin lesion which is coarse 
(like callous), rough and hard with intense itching
Vipadika: Skin condition characterised by cracking and 
fissuring of skin of palm and soles associated 
with severe pain
25

[p.32] Alasaka Skin condition characterised by swelling 
associated with itching and redness (especially 
between fingers)
Dadru Skin lesion resembling atasi flower (Linum 
usitaissimum), with elevated circular lesions 
which cluster and spread along the skin
Carmadala Skin condition characterised by formation of 
vesicles which later leads to peeling of 
superficial skin, associated with burning 
sensation and tenderness.
Pama Whitish/ reddish/bluish black coloured lesions 
manifesting in buttocks/ palms/ soles associated 
with itching and saddened appearance of skin.
Visphota Skin condition characterised by manifestation 
ofblister like skin lesions
Sataru Skin condition characterised by multiple broad- 
based ulcers, especially on joints with burning 
sensation
26

[p.33] Vicarcika Skin lesion characterised by papular eruptions 
with itching and discharge
Shwitra Skin condition characterised by de-pigmented 
areas without other symptoms
Ajagallika Skin lesions that occur in children with size and 
shape similar to that of green gram, which is 
hard and unctuous to touch
Andhalaji Firm, circular, elevated eruption similar to 
unripe fig, without opening
Indralupta Lesion characterised by loss of hair in scalp or 
such other areas.
Yuvanapidika Thick and hard eruption that appear on the skin 
of young people with fatty pultaceous material 
inside
27

[p.34] Chippa Lesion of nail bed characterised by suppuration 
and pain
Kunaka Rough, coarse and blackish appearance of nail
Charmakeela Nail like projection from the skin surface
Padadarika Fissuring and cracking of soles
Vyanga Blackish discoloration on skin of face
Darunaka Skin lesion characterised by dryness of scalp 
associated with itching and flaking
28

[p.35] General management of Skin disorders:
In Ayurveda, skin disorders like any other diseases are treated with Samsodhana and Samsamana Chikitsa. 
As mentioned above, Samshodana Chikitsa plays a vital role in the management of skin disorders. Treatment 
of various skin disorders according to various Acharyas of Ayurveda are illustrated below.
• In Vatajakusta (skin disorders dominated by Vata), medicated ghee is first administered internally. In 
Pittaja kusta (skin disorders dominated by Pitta), Raktamokshana (blood-letting) and Virechana 
(Therapeutic Purgation) should be administered, Raktamokshana (blood-letting) should be performed 
in the less acute stage of kusta bypracchana (rubbing with a coarse device) and in more acute stage 
of kusta by venesection. Kaphaja kusta (skin disorders dominated by kapha) is treated with Vamana 
(Therapeutic Emesis).
• Snehapanam (Internal administration of medicated Sneha (unctuous substances)):
Prior to Samshodana, Snehana is done with internal administration of following Snehas
> Mahatiktaka ghrita
> Tiktaka ghrita
> Vajraka ghritam
> Maha Vajraka ghritam
> Tuvaraka taila or
> Bhallataka taila
• Swedana (Sudation) is done one day prior to Vamana (Therapeutic Emesis) or three days in case of 
Virechana (Therapeutic Purgation). Usually Mridu swedana is done like exposure to sun or taking 
hot water bath etc.
• Vamana (Therapeutic Emesis) is done with Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica (ROTH.)
A.DC.),Madanaphala (Randia dumetorum LAM.) andMadhuka (Glycyrrhizaglabra L.) mixed 
with the juice or decoction ofPatola (Trichosanthes dioica ROXB.) and Nimba 
(Azadirachta indica A. JUSS.).
• Virechana (Therapeutic Purgation) is done with
> Trivrt (Operculina turpethum (L.) S. MANSO), Danti (Baliospermum montanum 
(WILLD.) MUELL.-ARG) and Triphala (Terminalia chebula RETZ. & WILLD., 
Terminalia bellerica ROXB. & Phyllanthus emblica L.)
> Manibhadra gudam or
> Avipatikara choornam.
29

[p.36] • Depending upon the intensity of sodhana, Samsarjana krama (administration of regulated diet after 
the therapy) from 3 to 7days should be followed.
• In patients with excess of Vata dosa after Virechana (Therapeutic Purgation), asthapana vasti 
(Medicated Decoction Enema) and anuvasana vasti (Medicated oil enema) should be administered.
• Nasya (inhalation therapy) with rock salt, Danti (Baliospermum montanum (WILLD.) MUELL- 
ARG.), Maricha (Piper nigrum L.), Phanijjhaka (Origanum majorana L.), Pippali (Piper 
longum L.) and fruit of Karanja (Pongamiapinnata (L.) PIERRE) cures kusta caused by 
aggravation of kapha and krimi.
• Vairecaniya dhuma (eliminative type of smoking therapy) cures krimi (worms), kusta and kilasa 
(vitiligo). (Ca. Ci 7:39-42)
• After Samshodana, administration of following drugs are advised (Su.Ci.9:6)
> Bhallataka
(Semecarpus anacardium 
L. F.)
W
Tuvaraka
(Hydnocarpus laurifolia
(d e n n s t ) STEUM.)
> Shilajatu (black 
asphaltum)
Khadira (Acacia catechu 
(L.F) WILLD.)
■ v -
> Guggulu
(Commiphora mukul
(h o o k . e x .
STOCKS) ENGL.)
Asana
(Pterocarpus marsupium 
ROXB.)
m
> Agaru
(Aquilaria agallocha 
ROXB.) S B
30

[p.37] • Herbal or herbo-mineral pastes or alkalies are used as external applications.
• Sulphur preparations: Administration of sulphur internally and externally is regarded as remedy par 
excellence for the cure of all types of skin diseases. (Ca. Ci.7:70)
• Siddhartaka snana: The water boiled with Musta (Cyperus rotundus L.), Madana 
(Randia dumetorum LAM.), Triphala (Terminalia chebulaRETZ. & WILLD., Terminalia bellerica 
ROXB. & Phyllanthus emblica L.), Karanja (Pongamiapinnata (L.) PIERRE), Aragvada 
(Cassia fistula L.), Indrayava (Holarrhena antidysenterica (ROTH.) A.DC.), Darvi 
(Berberis aristata DC.) and Saptaparna (Alstonia scholaris R.BR.) should be used for bath. (Ca. 
Ci 7:81-82)
• Vomiting should be induced every fortnight, purgation should be done every month, blood-letting in 
small amounts should be done twice a year and snuffs should be given every third day. This is done for 
chronic and recurrent skin disorders. (Su.Ci.9:43)
• Rasayanaprayogam: (A.H 19:53)
> Tuvara asthi (Hydnocarpus laurifolia (DENNST.) STEUM.)
> Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium L. F.)
> Bakuchi (Psoralea corylifolia L.) and
> Shilajatu (black asphaltum)
Bakuchi (Psoralea corylifolia L.)
• Samana Ausadas:
• Kwatham:
31

[p.38] > Mahamanjistadi Kwatha
> Punarnavadi Kwatha
> Guluchyadi Kwatha
> Panchatiktakam Kwatha
> Aragwadhadi Kwatha
> Nimbadi Kwatha
> Sonithamrutam Kwatha
> Nimbamritadi panchatiktam kwath
Arista/Asava.
> Khadiraristam
> Aragwadaristam
> Saribadyasavam
> Nimbamrutasavam
> Chitrakasavam
> Chandanasava
Lehyam:
> Manibadra gulam
> Amrutha bhalataka lehyam
> Haridrakhandam
> Madhusnuhi rasayanam (Big)
> Markava rasayanam
> Gandhaka rasayanam
Guggulu:
> Amrutha guggulu,
> Kaishora guggulu
Gulika:
> Arogyavardhini vati
> Gandhaka rasayanam
> Doosivishari gulika
> Krimighna vati
> Krimisodhini vati
> Vilwadigulika
Ghritam:
> Guggulu tiktaka ghritam
> Tiktakam ghritam
> Mahatiktaka ghritam
> Kalyanakam ghritam
> Satadhoutaghritam
Aragwadhadi panchatikta ghritam
32

[p.39] Churnam:
> Avipattikara churnam
> Rajanyadi churnam
> Nimbadi churnam
> Vara churnam
> Sudarsanamchurnam
Tailam:
> Guggulu marichadi tailam
> Vajraka tailam
> Maha vajraka tailam
> Durvadya tailam
> Maha marichady tailam
> Somaraji tailam
> Jeevantyadi yamakam
> Eladi tailam
> Dinesa eladi tailam
> Dinesa valyadi tailam
> Pamantaka tailam
> Gandhaka tailam
> Markava tailam
> Chemparathyadikeram
> Malatyadikeram
> Dhurdhoorapatradikeram
> Karappan tailam
> Kumkuma tailam
Lepam:
> Sindhuradi lepam
> Avalgujabeejadi lepam
> Rasottamadi lepam
> Rasakarpura lepam
Ras:
> Talakeswara ras
> Rasa manikyam
> Rasasindhuram
> Vyadhiharana rasa
33

[p.40] PATHYA (Wholesome diet & regimen) FOR KUSTA
Aharaja pathya 
(Ahara conducive in 
kushta )
Image
Aharaja pathya 
(Ahara conducive in 
kushta )
Image
Punarnava(Boerhavvia 
diffusa Linn.) 
spreading hog weed
Cakramarda dalani
(Cassia tora Linn.) 
ringworm plant
Amalaki (Emblica 
officinalis GAERTN.) 
goose berry
Khadira (Acacia 
catechu Willd) cutch 
tree
Bhallataka
(Semecarpus 
anacardium L. 
F.)Markingnut
Chitraka (Plumbago 
zeylanica L.)- 
leadwort
Triphala-(Emblica
officinalis GAERTN, 
Terminalia bellerica 
ROXB., Terminalia 
chebula RETZ. & 
WILLD)
Jatiphala (Myristica 
fragrans HOUTT)- 
nutmeg
Triphala
Kumkumam
(Crocus sativus L.)- 
saffron
Karanja (Pongamia 
pinnata (L.) 
Indian beech
34

[p.41] Oils
Tilataila (sesame
oil)(In excess causes 
skin diseases)
Sarshapa 
taila(mustard oil)
Nimbataila 
(Neem oil)
Mudga 
(green gram) 
(Vigna radiata (L.)
Kakamachi(Solanum 
nigrum L.)black 
nightshade
Karavellam 
(Momordica 
charantia L.) 
Bitter gourd
Nimba patra 
(Azadirachta indica 
A. JUSS.) Indian 
lilac
Bruhati 
(Solanum indicum 
L.) Poison berry
laghu anna pana ( 
intake of easily 
digestible food)
tikta rasa pradhana 
ahara ( bitter food 
items)
'
35

[p.42] Sali rice(Oryza 
sativa L.) Rice
Yava(Hordeum 
vulgare L.) barley
Godhuma (Triticum 
aestivum L.)Wheat
Bakuchi (Psoralea 
corylifolia L.) 
Purple Fleabane
Kodrava(Paspalum 
scrobiculatum L.) 
Kodo millet
jangala mamsa ( 
flesh of arid area 
dwelling animals)
Matravat asana ( eat 
only in the required 
quantity)
jeerne anna (eat 
only when the 
earlier food is 
digested )
virudhanna na 
asneeyat ( do not 
indulge in mutually 
contradictory food )
Eat only freshly 
prepared food(avoid 
spoiled food)
Eat hitasana 
(suitable food) and 
avoid ahitasana(un- 
suitable food)
avoid excess salty 
and sour food items
SALT AND SALTY FOODS
36

[p.43] avoid newly 
harvested food
Viharajapathya(Lifestyle to be adopted)
Neecha roma 
nakha(cut hair and 
nails at regular 
intervals)
abhyanga with 
karanja (pongamia 
pinnata) taila
regular snana 
( bathing daily )
udwarthana (dry 
massage with 
mediacted powder)
parisheka with 
khadira kashaya
Avoid virudha 
upakrama
Avoid Divaswapna vegavarodha
varjana
TOILET
shoka krodha 
varjana hima/atapa varjana
37

[p.44] pravaata varjana yoga
meditation Avoid
papakarma
SA DVR ITT A
(E T H IC A L REC IM I N >
follow sadvritta
G o o d
so cial
c o n d u c t
co n d u c t
perform 
panchakarma at 
regular intervals for 
detoxification.
Tanchakarmc?
APATHYA (Unwholesome diet & regimen) FOR KUSTA 
aharaja APATHYA (Food to be avoided in excess)
Amla rasa pradhana 
ahara ( sour food) 
katu rasa pradhana 
ahara(pungent food)
lavana rasa 
pradhana 
ahara(salty food)
38

[p.45] excess use of milk Dadhi -Curd
Anupa mamsa(meat 
of animals of marshy 
lands)
( B t
Guda-Jaggery
virudhasana 
(mutually 
contradictory food 
items
"T
IKJNEY^ 
,« *
ati snigdha anna 
(excessively 
unctuous food)
White Newly 
harvested Rice 
(within One year) & 
its preparations, 
Aromatic Rice 
(Basmati)
Vishamasanam 
(improper diet 
regimen)
Black Tila(Sesame), 
Masha (Udad/ black 
gram) & its 
preparations
Dravannam 
(excessive liquid 
foods)
39

[p.46] Suktha- fermented 
rhizomes, roots, 
fruits etc 
alongwith oil and 
salt
Viharaja Apathya (Lifestyle factors to be avoided in excess
Avyayam (lack of 
exercise and 
physical activity) 
snana
varjana(avoiding 
regular bath)
Tobacco smoking
Conclusion
excess krodha, soka 
and stress 
(Exposing to 
negative emotions)
• •
(excessive
sleeping)
Ahara and vihara forms the chief foundation up on which life ofindividual is founded. It is generally thought that 
diet has no direct relationship with diseases. But Ayurveda has described diet and regimen as the main causes 
for every disease. Contemporary medicine has less appreciated the role of dietary factors in the pathogenesis, 
progress and outcome of disease. Nutritional, biochemical and metabolic aspects of diet definitely play an 
important role in maintaining the normal integrity of skin and also promoting the immunological role of skin.
Traditionally, the verse depicts the importance of food
w mO 3\T’ “ which means that the outcome depends on the food that a person
consumes.
Dietary interventions may act as
40

[p.47] • Preventive factor by restricting the pathogenesis of many diseases
• It may interfere the course of disease, thereby resolving early.
• Dietary and lifestyle modifications may act as an adjuvant to nullify the adverse effects of common 
medicines and also may work synergistically with medicines to cure the disease
• Adopting strict lifestyle and diet regimen may help in preventing not only skin diseases but also 
many life-styles induced serious systemic diseases
• Observance of specific diet or activity as triggering factors to skin diseases, by avoiding such can 
prevent exacerbations and relapses of the disease.
• These Pathya and Apathya may help in preventing modifiable co-morbidities.
41

[p.48] REFRENCES
1. Acharya Brahmasankar Mishra. Bhavprakasha. 11th edition, Chaukhamba Publication, Varanasi, 
2005;1;p.85.
2. Agnivesa, Charaka samhita, sutrasthana 5/3-13, English translation by bhagwan Das and Sharma, 
Chaukhamba publications, Varanasi.
3. Vagbata, Astanga hridaya, sutrasthana 8/39, Chaukhamba sanskrt pratisthan, Varanasi
4. Vagbata, Astanga hridaya, sutrasthana 8/39, Chaukhamba sanskrt pratisthan, Varanasi
5. Suruta samhita, sutrasthana 46/493, by kaviraj ambikadatta shastri, Chaukhamba sanskrt pratisthan, 
Varanasi.
6. Agnivesha . In: Charaka, Dridhabala, Charaka Samhita, Sutra Sthana, 26/81. Reprint. Vaidya Jadavaji 
Trikamaji Acharya., editor. Varanasi: Krishnadas Academy; 2000. p. 149.
7. Mukund Sabnis, Viruddha Ahara: A critical view, Ayu 2012 Jul-Sep; 33(3): 332-336.,doi: 10.4103/ 
0974-8520.108817
8. http://www.tfpwellness.com/lifestyle- medicine.html
9. Uday Deshmukh & Bharat C. Chouragade: Concept Of Vihara In Ayurveda - A Review Article, 
International Ayurvedic Medical Journal, (ISSN: 2320 5091) (August, 2017) 5(8)
10. Sushurata. Sushruta Samhita, 14th edition,volume-1,Chaukhambha Sanskrit sansthan , Varanasi , 
2003,250
42
