TITLE: Ayurveda Based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders
AUTHOR: Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-15
PAGE COUNT: 34
======================================================================

[p.1] AYURVEDA BASED DIET 
AND LIFE STYLE GUIDELINES 
FOR PREVENTION OF 
CARDIAC DISORDERS
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES 
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India 
New Delhi

[p.2] ■ I l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
AYURVEDA BASED DIET 
AND LIFE STYLE GUIDELINES 
FOR PREVENTION OF 
CARDIAC DISORDERS
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India
New Delhi
1 I N I I I N I I I N I I N I I I N I I I N I I I I I I I N I I I N I I I N I I N I I I N I I I N I I I I I I I N I I I N I I I N I I I I I I I N I I I N I I I N I I N I I I N I I I N I I I I I I I N I I I N I I I N I I N I I I N I

[p.3] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
© Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India, New Delhi - 110058
First Edition - 2018
Publisher: Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH, Government of 
India, New Delhi, J. L. N. B. C. A. H. Anusandhan Bhavan, 61-65, Institutional Area, Opp. D-Block, 
Janakpuri, New Delhi - 110 058, E-mail: dg-ccras@nic.in, Website : www.ccras.nic.in
Disclaimer: All possible efforts have been made to ensure the correctness of the contents. However 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences, Ministry of AYUSH, shall not be accountable 
for any inadvertent error in the content. Corrective measures shall be taken up once such errors are 
brought to notice.
Note: These are general guidelines & advocacies and should only be followed under supervision of 
qualified registered Ayurveda practicetioner.
ISBN : 978-93-83864-31-7
Printed a t : JK Offset Graphics Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi-110020
i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i

[p.4] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Prologue
Ayurveda evolved as a comprehensive health care system through systematic experimentation by 
generating reproducible evidence. These evidences are further expanded and documented as 
classical texts of Ayurveda such as Charaka Samhita, Susrutha Samhita, Astanga Sangraha etc. 
Further in the medieval period, several new classics such as Bhavaprakasha, Shamgdhara 
Samhita, Chakradatta etc have expanded the scope, emphasizing on prevention and management 
of diseases through dietary and preventive interventions.
Ayurveda vividly describes the conducive and non-conducive substances including diet, 
medicines etc and has classified them into three major categories, viz, Shamana (palliative), 
Kopana (aggravating) and Swastha Hita (conducive to health). Ayurveda has also emphasized on 
three major factors responsible for causation of any illness such as Asatmyendriyartha Samyoga 
(incompatible correlation of sense organs), Prajnaparadha (intellectual blasphemy) and 
Parinama (disharmony with rhythms and cycles of nature); avoidance of which is essential for 
maintenance of health and prevention of diseases.
Detailed description concerning functional anatomy and physiology of Hridaya and associated 
illnesses are available in Ayurvedic literature. Hridaya (heart) is the mula (main seat) of 
Rasavaha Srotas or circulatory system in the body. The vitiation of this system may lead to 
diseases such as Sthoulya, Hridroga etc. The role of Vyana Vayu and Ojus which are major 
functional attributes also contribute significantly to the health and disease of cardio-vascular 
system.
In recent times, there has been an emerging shift in epidemiologic and demographic pattern of 
diseases, and non-communicable diseases are emerging as a major share of disease burden in 
developing countries. Cardiovascular disorders and other allied conditions contributing to 
cardiac illness are also spreading in this pattern. Prevention and management of these conditions 
are pivotal to reduce the disease burden and also facilitate to cut the health costs grossly. 
Ayurveda offers a comprehensive and personalized approach for such conditions.
The council has taken initiatives to present a user friendly guidelines on prevention of cardio­
vascular diseases through dietary and lifestyle advocacies based on principles of Ayurveda, 
meeting the contemporary requirements. These guidelines are certainly useful for physicians and 
health seekers alike, approaching Ayurveda healthcare set-ups.
i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i

[p.5] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
INDEX
S. No. Content Page No.
1. Prologue iii
2. Background 1
3. Concept of Ahara (Diet) in Ayurveda
2.1 Viruddha Ahara (Dietetic Incompatibility)
1 - 2
4. Concept of Vihara (Lifestyle) in Ayurveda
3.1 Dinacharya (Daily regimen)
3.2 Rithucharya (Seasonal regimen)
3.3 Sada vritta (Ethical Regimen): Rules of good conduct
3.4 Dhamiya & Adhamiyavega (Preventive Regimens)
2 - 5
5. Preventive Cardiology-An overview 5 - 8
6. Preventive / Therapeutic dietary and lifestyle measures 
as per Ayurveda
9-14
7. Cardiac Risk Factors -Preventive Cardiology
6.1 Preventive Measures as per Ayurveda
6.2 Madhumeha (Diabetes Mellitus)
6.3 Uchcharaktachapa (Hypertension)
6.4 Sthaulya (Obesity)
15-21
8. Diet Chart for Vata Prakriti Purush 22
9 . Diet Chart for Pitta Prakriti Purush 23
10. Diet Chart for Kapha Prakriti Purush 24
11. References 25-27
Miiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii

[p.6] AYURVEDA BASED DIET & LIFE STYLE GUIDELINES 
FOR PREVENTION OF CARDIAC DISORDERS 
1. Background
The incidence of lifestyle diseases like hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, 
and overweight/obesity associated with cardiovascular diseases is on the rise. Cardiovascular 
disorders continue to be the major cause of mortality representing about 30% of all deaths 
worldwide. With rapid economic development and increasing urbanization of lifestyle in the past 
few decades, prevalence of these diseases has reached alarming proportions among Indians in the 
recent years. As Ayurveda is recognized as foremost life science and describes ways to prevent 
and manage lifestyle disorders, the world is being attracted towards its potential. Ayurveda 
provides effective solutions in the forms of dietary regulation, lifestyle advisory, detoxification 
and bio-purification procedures like Panchakarma, since it targets preventive, palliative 
rejuvenative interventions and medicaments. The holistic approach of Ayurveda, treating the 
patient as a whole, meaning intervention targeted towards complete physical, psychological, 
and spiritual well-being makes this science a wonderful option in lifestyle disorders.
Basically in Ayurveda, promotion of health and prevention of diseases is given more 
importance than the treatment of the diseases. Health and diseases is dependent on three factors
1.e. Ahara (Diet), Vihara (life style practices) & Oushadha (Drug& therapies). Among these, 
food (Ahara) is considered as most important one. Pathya is defined as the ahara (diet) which 
is congenial to a person according to his constitution, appetite & digestive capacity of the body. 
Most health problems develop due to the wrong eating and improper cooking. The planning 
of diet, based on certain principles mentioned in Astavidhi vishesayatan is very rational and 
scientific. Ayurveda emphasizes the characteristics of food in terms of quality, quantity and time 
which vary with age, constitution, habitat, digestive power, season, disease and also liking of 
the patient. One has to consume the diet, which is suitable to him in all aspects, and deviation 
from these may cause diseases. In addition to these, wrong cooking procedures, irregular timing, 
and consuming imbalanced and non-congenial food and not following the prescribed rules for 
preparing, preserving and eating food may also cause imbalance of health. The proper intake 
of diet not only can prevent many health disorders but also plays major role in the management 
of diseases. Therefore, due consideration should be given to all aspects of diet- planning for 
treatment of diseases and to maintain the health, according to Ayurveda.
The Ayurvedic regime of healthy life is designed for achievement of a long, healthy 
active life, providing relief from pain and disease allowing enjoyment of life with attainment of 
satisfaction & contentment. Elaborate description is available on personal hygiene encompassing 
diet and regimen during daily routine ( Dinacharya), seasonal routine ( Ritucharya) and 
behavioral and ethical principles (Sadvritta). Observance of certain rules regarding suppressible 
and non-suppressible urges also paves way towards positive health. Cardiac risk factors can be 
prevented or managed by lifestyle including principles of Dinacharya, Ritucharya and sadvrtta.
2. Concept of Ahara (Diet)
Any material in the universe, according to Ayurveda is composed of five basic elements, 
the Pancha Mahabhootas, namely Earth ( Prithvi), Water (Ap), Fire ( Teja), Air ( Vayu) and 
Ether (Akasha) including human body and the food. Tridoshas i.e. Vata, Pitta & Kapha which 
constitutes the body is also made up of Panchamahabhootas viz Vata is made up of Vayu and
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
1Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.7] Akasha mahabhoota, Pitta is made up of Agni and Jala mahabhoota and Kapha is made up 
of Jala and Prthvi mahabhoota. Planning and indulging in the diet balancing these elements 
maintain the homoeostasis of the body.
Each dietary item may have dosha aggravating, dosha pacifying or dosha balancing 
actions in the body. Specific diet has been mentioned in Ayurveda to maintain the balance of 
Doshas disturbed due to various factors like season, age etc.The food contains six basic tastes 
and each taste has pre-dominance of particular elements of Pancha mahabhoota which exerts 
specific effect on the Tridoshas & Dhatus. The Madhura (Sweet) rasa has predominance of 
Prithvi & Aap elements, Amla (Sour) rasa has predominance of Prithvi & Agni, Lavana (Salt) 
rasa has predominance of Aap & Agni, Katu (Pungent) rasa has predominance of Agni & Vayu, 
Thikta (Bitter) rasa has predominance of Vayu & Akash and Kashaya (Astringent) rasa has 
predominance of Prithvi & Vayu. It is mentioned that, drugs having sweet, sour and salty taste 
alleviate Vata, those having astringent, sweet and bitter tastes alleviate Pitta and those having 
astringent, pungent and bitter tastes alleviate Kapha dosha.
In Ayurveda specific principles are described for consuming diet. It is not possible to 
derive the entire benefit out of food, simply on the basis of quantity of intake, without considering 
the eight factors like Prakrti (Qualitative characteristics of the food), Karana (Processing of 
food), Samyoga (combination of food), Rashi (The quantity of food), Desha (Habitat of the 
person), Kala (Time& seasonal variation), Upayoga Samstha (Variable digestibility of various 
food articles) and Upayokta (The person who consumes the food).
Fat rich diet harms the body in the long run and very low fat diet is also unhealthy in 
that it could result in fatty acid deficiency syndromes. Regular physical exercise, not heavy 
exercise, keeps the body healthy, both by suppressing appetite after a while and burning extra 
calories if needed.
2.1 Viruddhahara (Dietetic Incompatibility)
The food with incompatible or contradictory qualities has poisonous effect on the body 
that aggravates Tridoshas in turn leading to various disorders viz: Gulma (Lump), Allergies 
and Skin diseases. It also destroys strength, vigour, memory, immunity etc. The dietary 
incompatibility is due to Desha (climate), Kala (season), Agni (digestive power), Matra 
(quantity), Satmya (adaptability/customization), Doshas (tridosha), Samskara (mode of 
processing), Aharavirya (potency of food), Kostha (bowel habits) , Avastha (state of health), 
Krama (order of food intake), Parihara (restriction), Upachara (prescription), Sanyoga 
(combination) , Hridya (delicious), Sampad (richness of quality)and Vidhi (rules of eating).Few 
contradictory combinations mentioned in the classics are fish or its soup along with milk, milk 
or milk products with alcoholic beverages , radish consumed with milk and lotus stem with 
honey etc.
3. Concept of Vihara (Lifestyle)
The Dinacharya, Ritucharya and Sadvritta are parts of correct/ideal Lifestyle measures 
mentioned in Ayurvedic classics for maintenance of health and also to achieve a long, healthy 
active life, providing relief from pain and disease. Detailed description of personal hygiene 
encompass diet and regimen during daily routine ( Dinacharya), seasonal routine (Ritucharya ) 
and behavioral, rules of good conduct (Sadvritta) and description of suppressible (Dhamiya 
vega) & non suppressible(Adhamiya vega) urges is available in Ayurveda.
I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I
2 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.8] Abstain from those factors which cause mental agony:-It is not what you eat that kills you; 
it is what eats you (negative thoughts) that kills you. (Hippsley-Cox J, Fielding K, and Pringle 
M. Depression as a risk factor for IHD in men). There are a host of scientific studies, both 
prospective and retrospective, that have shown a very close cause-effect relationship between 
negative thoughts like anger, pride, hostility, and depression and vascular diseases and, even, 
cancer!.
3.1 Dinacharya (Daily regimen)
• It is advisable to wake up during Brahma Muhurta (preferably between 4.00 a.m. to 5.30
a.m.).
• One should attend the nature’s calls.
• The soft brushes made out of twigs of Khadira, Karanja, Apamarga etc. should be used 
for brushing the teeth.
• Tongue should be cleaned by a long flexible strip of metal or plant twig. It not only 
cleanses the tongue but also stimulates digestion. Mouth should also be cleaned properly.
• Chewing of betel leaves with small pieces of Areca nut ( Khadira) and fragrant substances 
like cardamom, cloves, refreshes the mouth and enhance digestion.
• It is necessary to massage ( Abhyanga) whole body with oil every day. Oil massage ensures 
softness and unctuousness of skin, free movement of joints and muscles, peripheral 
circulation and elimination of metabolic wastes.
• Regular exercise ( Vyayama) is essential for perfect health. It builds up stamina and 
resistance against disease, clears the channels of body ( Srotas) and increases the blood 
circulation. It enhances efficiency of body organs, promotes appetite and digestion and 
prevents obesity.
• Whole body massage with dry powders of yava,kola & kulath (Udvartana) every day.
• Bathing ( Snana) improves enthusiasm, strength, sexual vigour, appetite, span of life and 
removes sweat and other impurities from the body. After bath one should wear clean 
clothes and smear the body with perfume.
• One should have regular shaving, haircut ( Kshaura Karma), cutting of nails ( Nakh 
apkartana) etc.
3.2 Rithucharya (Seasonal regimen)
In Ayurvedic classics, there has been a thorough consideration for seasons, besides 
the dietetic regimens for days and nights. Whole year is divided into six seasons and detailed 
dietetic regimen for these seasons is prescribed. In spring season, bitter, hot and astringent diet 
is advised while salty, sour and sweet food should be avoided. Wheat, barley, honey syrup, 
fruits like mango, jack fruit-etc. and meat of forest animals is advised. In summer season due to 
hot climate, aggravation of pitta occurs. Hence pitta pacifying cold, liquid, sweet and oily diet 
is advised. Excessive hot, spicy, sour salty diet should be avoided. Intake of rice, milk, ghee, 
sugar, grapes, coconut water, meat of forest animals are advised. In rainy season aggravation of 
vata occurs, hence vata shamaka sweet, sour and salty food and drinks are preferred. The food 
should be hot, dry, fatty and easily digestible.
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
3Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.9] Preserved rice, wheat, barley and mutton soups are advised. In pre winter and winter 
season Vatadosha aggravates due to cold, dry, chilly atmosphere in this season hence vataghna, 
pittavardhaka diet is recommended. Hot, sweet, sour and salty food, milk, sugarcane, rice, oils 
and fats are advised and in autumn season aggravation of Pitta dosha occurs. Therefore, it is 
ideal to take ghee processed with bitter drugs; purgation, bloodletting, coolant, and light diet are 
advised. Diets dominant in Bitter, sweet, pungent diets are advised ideal in this season.
3.3 Sadvritta (Rules of good conduct)
Ayurveda prescribes certain rules for maintaining healthy mind. These are principles 
of right conduct that are applicable to all people at all times and places. Practicing them gives 
balance and harmony to the mind. These are
• Whenever possible, devote your services to God, to the wise and to respectable or elderly 
individuals.
• Always speak the truth
• Do not lose your temper under any circumstances
• Do not get addicted to sensory pleasures.
• Do not harm anyone.
• As far as possible, do not expose yourself to hardships.
• Try to control your passions.
• Endeavor to speak pleasant and sweet words.
• Meditate every day for tranquility of mind.
• Observe cleanliness in all things.
• Be patient
• Observe self-control
• Try to distribute knowledge, good advice and help to others.
• Be straightforward and kind.
• Avoid irregularity in daily activities.
• Avoid over eating, overdrinking, too much sexual activity, too much or too little sleep.
• Behave according to the time and place where you are residing.
• Act always in a courteous and polite manner.
• Control your sense organs.
• Make a habit of doing all that is good and avoiding all that is bad.
3.4 Dharniya & Adharniyavega (Preventive Regimens)
Observations of certain prescriptions and prohibitions given by Ayurveda ensure physical, 
mental and spiritual well-being.
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.10] Non-Suppressible Urges
There are thirteen natural urges. Suppression of which leads to many diseases as given below:
• Suppression of urge for urination leads to difficulty in passing urine, urinary stone, 
atony of bladder and inflammation of urinary tract.
• Suppression of urge for passing stool leads to pain in abdomen, indigestion, gas in 
abdomen, headache.
• Suppression of flatus leads to pain in abdomen, indigestion, heart diseases, constipation 
or diarrhea.
• Suppression of ejaculation of semen may produce a stone (Spermato-lith), pain in testis 
and difficulty in intercourse.
• Suppression of vomiting produces different types of diseases like urticaria, giddiness, 
anaemia, hyperacidity, skin diseases and fever.
• Suppression of sneezing may produce rhinitis and chronic cold, headache, sinusitis and 
diseases of respiratory system.
• Suppression of eructation leads to hiccough, pain in chest, cough and loss of appetite.
• Suppression of yawning leads to diseases of the eyes, throat, ear and nose.
• Suppression of hunger and thirst may lead to nutritional disorders and debility.
• Suppression of tears leads to mental disorders, pain in chest, giddiness and digestive 
disorders.
• Suppression of respiration may cause suffocation, respiratory disorders, heart diseases 
and even death.
• Suppression of sleep causes the diseases like insomnia, mental disorders, digestive 
disorders and diseases of sense organs.
Suppressible Urges
One should suppress urges of greed, grief, fear, fury, pride, shamelessness, envy and
excessive passion. Observe self-control and always speak truth. One should not harm others
and should always act in a courteous and polite manner.
• Dietetic and behavioural bad habits should be given up and good' things should be taken 
up gradually. An intelligent person who seeks happiness should make a great effort to 
make good company and avoid the bad one.
4. Preventive Cardiology-An overview
More than 50% of the deaths and disability from heart disease and strokes, which together 
kill more than 12 million people each year, can be cut down by a combination of simple and cost 
effective national efforts and individual attentions to reduce major risk factors. 80% of all CVD 
deaths worldwide occur in developing, low and middle income countries. CVD has become one 
of the major leading causes of deaths in developing countries. It is estimated that 90% of CVD 
is preventable. Prevention of CVD involves improving risk factors through: healthy eating, 
exercise, avoidance of tobacco smoke and limiting alcohol intake.
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
5Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.11] As per Ayurveda, the food consumed by an individual is transformed in the intestinal 
tract by the action of koshtagni i.e, digestive fire. Production of ahararasa, which is normal 
in quality and quantity, depends upon the normalcy of koshtagni. The Rasa Dhatu is the 
first Dhatu which gets formed from the Ahara Rasa i.e. nutrient portion of food after proper 
digestion of food and is circulated by the action of vyana vayu throughout the body providing 
nutrition to seven dhatus, viz, Rasa, Rakta, Mamsa, Medas, Asthi, Majja and Sukra. The organs 
and channels through which this Rasa Samvahana (circulation) takes place are collectively 
termed as Rasavaha Srotas and Hridaya along with the ten Mula Dhamanis (great vessels) are 
considered as Mula (main organ) of this Srotas. In contrast, if the quality and quantity of Ahara 
and /or Kostagni are not in appropriate condition, it leads to improper digestion of food and 
subsequent formation of abnormal Rasa dhatu which has direct impact on Hridaya, the seat of 
Rasavaha srotas. In other words, the indiscretions followed by human beings in terms of Ahara 
(diet) and Vihara (lifestyle) can directly cause impairment of Agni and thus leads to formation 
of vitiated rasa dhatu. This vitiated rasadhatu is not capable of performing its normal functions 
of providing proper nutrition to seven dhatus in human body.
According to Ayurveda, excessive consumption of food which is heavy to digest, dry, 
cold and with bitter or astringent qualities, excessive physical exertion, altered patterns of 
sleep including day sleep, forceful withholding of urges or initiation of urges, excessive 
indulgence in purgation, emesis or enema procedures, mental stress, excessive fear, over 
thinking, anxiety and indulgences in medications to counteract these things can be broadly 
classified into Aharaja, Viharaja and Manasika factors which in turn vitiate the agni and 
subsequently the rasadhatu. The impaired rasadhatu in circulation, in presence of impaired 
agni at the levels of koshta and dhatus and vitiated vyana vayu, eventually paves the way for 
metabolic disorders such as medoroga, sthoulya, prameha etc which are milestones in the 
pathogenesis of hrid-vikara.
The common causative/predisposing factors for hridrogas as described in authoritative 
texts of Ayurveda are enumerated below so that these can be prevented for a healthy
I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I
heart.
1. Excessive use of hot ( Ushna), oily (Snigdha), spicy (Iikta) and fried food items.
2. Excessive use of astringent (Kashaya rasa) and irritant (Tikshna) food items.
3. Use of incompatible diet (viruddhaahara).
4. Excessive physical exercise or lack of exercise.
5. Excessive stress, fear and anger.
6. Retention of natural urges ( Adharniya Vega).
7. Excessive fasting (Ati-karshari).
8. Over eating and irregular food habits.
9. Improper application of vasti and drastic purgatives.
10. Excessive consumption of alcohol/tobacco/cigarette etc.
11. Injury over chest ( Vaksha pradesh).
6 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.12] Common Symptoms of Hridroga
I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
1. Anorexia (Aruchi)
2. Dis-taste of mouth (Mukhavairasya)
3. Nausea (Kaphotklesh)
4. Increased thirst(Trishna)
5. Dyspnoea (Shwas)
6. Fainting (Murchha)
7. Hiccough(Hikka)
8. Chest pain (UrahShool)
9. Cough (Kasa)
10. Vomiting (Chhardi)
11. Pallor/Cyanosis (Vivamata)
12. Stupor (Pramoh)
13. Coating inside throat (Galoplepa)
14. Fever (Jwar)
15. Productive Cough (KaphaShthivan)
Food articles to be consumed /not to be consumed regularly
Ayurveda prescribes specific diet patterns in the diseased conditions. According to the principles 
of Ayurveda, derangement of the digestive power occurs in many diseases and hence it is 
important to restore normalcy of the digestive power.
Food articles to be consumed regularly
Sr. No. Aahara Dravyas
1 . Sastika(type of Rice) A kind of rice harvested in sixty days
2. Shali (type of Rice) Oryza sativum Linn
3. Mudga (Pulse) Phaseolus mungo Linn.
4. Saindhava (type of salt) Rock salt
5. Amalaka(fruit) Emblica officinalis Gaertn.
6. Antarika Jala Rain water
7. Ghrita Ghee
8. Jangala Masa (meat) Meat of animals dwelling in arid climate
9. Madhu Honey
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.13] ^■Illlllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Food articles not to be consumed regularly
Sr.No. Aahara Dravyas
1. Dadhi Curd
2. Kurcika If milk cooked with curd or butter milk it will separate into liquid 
and solid portion called as Kurcika
3. KTlata The solid part separated form kurcika
4. Kshara Alkaline preparations
5. Shukta Mixing mastu(whey) with honey, jiggery, Kanji etc. and keep for 
three days- the fermented preparation called as Sukta
6. Aamamulaka Uncooked radish
7. Krisha Aamisha Meat of emaciated animals
8. Shuska Aamisha Dried meat
9. Varaha Aamisha Pork
10. Avi Aamisha Meat of sheep
11. Go- Aamisha Beaf meat
12. Matsya Fish
13. Mahish Aamisha Meat of buffalo
14. Masha Black gram
15. Nishpava Bean
16. Shaluka Tuberous root
17. Bisa The fiber of lotus
18. Payasa Sweets prepared by grinding cereals
19. Virudha Sprouted seeds
20. Shuska Shaka Dried leaves
21. Yavaka Rice of Yavaka variety of paddy
22. Phanita Molasses
The unwholesome form of vegetables and fruits
• Vegetables infested with insects, exposed to wind and sun for long time, dried up, 
old (Puraana) and unseasonal ( Anartavam ) are unwholesome. When they are cooked 
without adding fat (Nisneha-Siddham ) and residual water after boiling as not filtered out 
(Aparistttam), vegetables becomes unwholesome for use.
• Fruits which are old, unripe, afflicted by insects and serpents, exposed to snow or sun 
for long time, growing in the land and season other than the normal habitat and time and 
putrefied are unwholesome.
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders8

[p.14] ■ I l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
5. Preventive / Therapeutic dietary and lifestyle measures as per Ayurveda
Aharaja pathya (Dietary factors)
Jurnahva Shyamaka Puranashali
ShamiDhanya (Pulses)
^ Adhaki( red gram- 
Cajanuscajan),
^ Kulattha (horse gram)
(Dolichos biflorus Linn.) 
should be taken with 
bitter and astringent leafy 
vegetables.
^ Mudga( green gram) ( Vigna 
radiata)) should be taken 
with bitter and astringent 
leafy vegetables.
^ Makushtha (Vigna 
aconitifolia)
^ Chanaka (Cicer arietinum)
Adhaki Kulattha Mudga
Makushtha Chanaka
Shuka Dhanya (Cereals)
^ Kzva(Barley) (Hordeum 
vulgare L.)
^ Godhuma (wheat)(Triticum 
vulgare Vill.)
/
' Kodrava (grain variety)
(Paspolum scrobiculatum)
^ Uddalaka(forest variety of 
kodrava)
/
* Kangu (Seteria italica)
^ Madhulika ( Eleusine 
coracana)
/
* Jurnahva(Sorghum vulgare)
^ Shyamaka (Echinochloa 
frumentacea)
^ Puranashali{old rice more 
than one year after harvesting)
Uddalaka Kangu Madhulika
Godhuma
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders | 9

[p.15] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Phala Varga (Fruits)
^ Amalaki (Phyllanthus 
emblica)
Kapitha (Feronia limonia) 
Parushaka (Grewia
asiatica)
Vrikshamla (Garcenia 
morella)
Bilva (Aegle 
marmelos)
Naranga (Oranges)
Jambeera (Citrus 
Lemon)
Dadima (Punica 
granatum}
Arara(Mangifera
indica)
Badara (Ziziphus 
jujuba)
Milk & milk products
^ Go Dugdha (Cow’ s Milk) 
treated with turmeric
^ Takra (defatted-Butter milk)
Cow s Milk) treated Butter milk
with turmeric
Amalaki Kapitha Parushaka
Oils
^ Atasi(Linum usitatisimum ) 
^ Sarshapa (mustard)
Atasi Sarshapa
Naranga
I '
Amra
Bilva
Dadima
Jambeera
Badara
10 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.16] ■ I l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l l
Spices
v Maricha (black Pepper) 
^ Tvak (Cinnamon)
^ Lashuna (Garlic)
/
Shunthi (Dry Ginger)
^ Dhanyaka (Coriandrum) 
^ Jeeraka (Cumin seeds) 
^ Methika (Fenugreek)
Udvartan (Dry Massage 
with Powder)
Snana (Bath)
Chankramana (Walking)
Exercise
Yoga
Optimum activity
Haridra Maricha Tvak Lashuna
Dhanyaka Shunthi Jeeraka Methika
Udvartan(Dry Massage Chankramana (Walking) 
with Powder)
Exercise Yoga
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders | 11

[p.17] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Restricted Use
Aharaja Apathya (Dietary factors to be avoided in excess)
Shuka /)/?a/ijfl(Cereals)
White Newly harvested 
Rice (within One year) & its 
preparations, Aromatic Rice 
(Basmati)
Maida & its preparations
Bread, Noodles, Pasta, Maida 
biscuits, Maida
Maida Chapati, Maida Barfi, 
Puri
Newly Harvested Rice Bread
Noodles Pasta Maida Biscuits
Maida Chapati Maida Barfi Puri
Rajamasha
Mamsa Varga (Non-veg)
✓ Gramyaudakanuparasa
(meat soup of the domestic, 
aquatic and marshy animals)
Meat soup of pork, buffalo, 
fish etc. Gramya udaka nupa rasa pork fish
Shami Dhanya (Pulses)
^ Black Tila(Sesame)J\/[asha 
(Udad/ black gram & its 
preparations
^ Rajamasha (Cow pea), Matara 
(Pea)
Black Tila Masha
12 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.18] ■Illlllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
✓
✓
✓
Shaka Varga: Kanda (tubers)
Potato, sweet potato, beetroot, 
cabbage and its preparations
French fries, Chips, Alutikki
Potato sweet potato beetroot
French fries Chips Alutikki
MadyaVarga ( Drink)
^ Navamadyapana(fre shly 
brewed alcoholic drinks) 
Sweet alcoholic drinks -Red 
wine is suggested to be good 
for heart
✓ Better to avoid all kinds of 
alcohol
Navamadyapana
Pana (Water)
✓ Varsha Ritu Jala, Soft drinks, 
Soda, Cold drinks
Sweet fruit juices
i Ii A h if _ u l
Soft drinks, Soda, Cold drinks
Sweet fruit juices
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.19] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Lifestyle factors to be avoided in excess
Viharaja Apathy a (Lifestyle factors to be avoided in excess)
^ Atimatrasevana (excessive eating)
^ Aasyasukham (enjoying the pleasure 
of continuous sitting)
^ Swapnasukham (enjoying the 
pleasure of excessive sleeping )
^ Avyayam (lack of exercise and 
physical activity )
2)/wflsw«/>«(sleeping in the daytime/ 
afternoon)
v4a/asya(laziness)
Tobacco smoking
14 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.20] 6. Cardiac Risk Factors -Preventive Cardiology 
Non modifiable risk factors
1. Advancing age.
2. Genetic predisposition.
Modifiable risk factors
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
1. Sedentary life style.
2. Hypertension.
3. Type-II Diabetes mellitus.
4. Dyslipidemia / Lipid disorders.
5. Overweight/Obesity.
6. Metabolic syndrome.
7. Smoking/alcohol consumption.
Emerging risk factors
1. Infections due to helicobacter pylori and Chlamydia pneumonia.
2. Calcium supplementation.
3. Vitamin D deficiency.
4. Anti-phospholipids Syndrome.
5. Premature Births/Low Birth weight.
The Ayurvedic guidelines for modifiable risk factors i.e. Madhumeha(Diabetes), Sthaulya 
(Obesity), Uchcharaktachap(Hypertension) and Medoroga (Dyslipidaemia) are given 
below.
15Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.21] 6.1 Madhumeha (Diabetes)
A condition characterised by excess (prabhut) elimination of turbid (avil) mutra( urine) is 
termed as prameha. Prameha is mentioned as Santarpanjanyavyadhi i.e. disease caused by over 
eating and sedentary lifestyle. Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus) is mentioned as a special variety 
of Vataja Prameha. Acharya Sushrutha and Vagbhatta mentioned that if all pramehas when left 
untreated/not treated properly may eventually get converted to Madhumeha. Madhumeha is 
also termed as Ojomeha & Kshaudrameha.
Causes
1. Excessive sleeping ( Swapnasukham ), lack of physical activity or exercise (Aasyasukham).
2. Excessive intake of sweet, sugar ( Gudavaikrit), milk (payah), dairy products (Dadhi).
3. Excessive intake of carbohydrate rich diet especially newly harvested e.g. rice, maida
etc (Nava annapana).
4. Excessive or regular intake of fried or oily food items.
5. Psychological factors like fear, grief, anger etc.
6. Children of parents suffering from Madhumeha are more likely to have this disease. 
Symptoms
• Excessive and frequent urination (Prabhuta mutrata)
• Passing of turbid urine (Avila mutrata)
• Excessive thirst ( Pipasa - Trishna) and hunger
• Buming/Tingling/Pricking sensation in the hands or feet (Hasta padasuptata)
• Feeling of tiredness ( Alasya)
Preventive Measures as per Ayurveda
Pathya (Do’s)
• Timely intake of diet.
• Intake of old harvested cereals, barley ( Yava), Sorghum ( Jowar), whole wheat atta, 
bitter gourd (Karela), green leafy vegetables; garlic (Lasuna), turmeric (Haridra), aloe 
(Kumari) among vegetables and fruits like Guava, Oranges, Indian Blackberry ( Jamun) 
etc. may be useful.
• Reduce intake of rice, food rich in carbohydrate and fried or processed food.
• Regular exercise especially walking
• Regular practice of Yoga, Meditation etc. under the supervision of Yoga specialist is
suggested.
Apathya (Don’ts)
• Sugarcane juice, jaggery, sugar and milk products.
• Sedentary lifestyle.
• Sleeping in the day time and excessive sleeping
I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders16

[p.22] • Alcohol consumption
• Prolonged fasting
• Cold drinks, Ice cream, burger- pizza and other fast foods etc.
The role of ahara (dietary regimen) & vihara (lifestyle) are equally important in diabetes 
to control blood sugar level as well as to prevent complications of this disease.
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders | 17

[p.23] 6.2 Uchcharaktachapa (Hypertension)
As per Ayurveda, the disease is supposed to be Vataja probably due to Vaishamya 
(imbalance) of Vyanavayu. Cardiac functions ( Hridayadharan ) are regulated mainly by Vata 
particularly Vyana (responsible for Praspandana, Asriksravana) and Prana (responsible for 
Raktaanudhavand). Associated conditions like Palpitation (Hridrava), Headache (Shirahashula), 
Vertigo (Bhrama), Insomnia (Nidranasha), Tinnitus (Kama nada) are described as VatajaVikara 
in Ayurveda.
Some similar situations are described in Ayurvedic texts under Raktagatavata, 
Raktavritavata, Pittavritavata.
Causes
1. Obesity.
2. Sedentary lifestyle and lack of physical exercise.
3. Excessive intake of oily, salty, sour and spicy food items.
4. Excessive alcohol consumption and smoking.
5. Psychological factors such as stress, anxiety, anger etc.
Symptoms
Any of the following symptom/s may be present -
• Headache, Vertigo
• Breathlessness
• Discomfort/Pain in chest
• Irritability
• Nausea, vomiting
• Loss of appetite
• Bleeding from nose
• Haziness of vision
• Swelling in legs and under eyes
• Feeling of burning sensation and/or numbness in hands and feet.
• Feeling of tiredness, restlessness
Preventive Measures as per Ayurveda
Pathya{ Do’s)
• Barley(Kzva), sorghum( Jowar), wheat, green gram(Mudga/Moongdat), horse gram, moringa 
(Shigru), Bitter gourd (karela), bottle gourd(Ghia/ Lauki), turnip(Shalgam), carrot(Gajar), 
radish(Muli), Indian gooseberry ( Amla), cucumber(K7z/ra), black grapes (Draksha), 
pomegranate(^4«ar), apple, pineapple, cold milk etc.
• Reduce intake of oily, salty, sour and spicy food items.
I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders18

[p.24] • Timely intake of balanced diet and increase the quantity of fruit and vegetable intake .
• Weight reduction
• Timely sleeping and awakening.
• Regular blood pressure check-up.
• Regular physical exercise.
• Daily brisk walking for half an hour.
• Regular practice of Yoga, Meditation etc. under the supervision of Yoga expert. 
Apathya(Don’t% )
• Excessive intake of salt (sprinkling over salad, curd etc.)
• Excessive use of butter, ghee, chilies (red-green), pickles, bengal gram, sour fruits, curd, 
tea, coffee etc.
• Intake of animal fat, processed/oily food items.
• Alcohol consumption and smoking.
• Practice of day sleeping and awakening at night.
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders | 19

[p.25] 6.3 Sthaulya (Obesity)
Atisthaulya (Obesity) is considered and described as one of the Ashta ninditiya purusha 
(eight despicable conditions) by Charaka [28]. A person with excessive accumulation of Meda 
(fat/adipose tissue) and Mamsa (flesh/muscle tissue) leading to flabbiness of hips, abdomen, 
and breast has been categorized as Atisthula. It is considered as one of the Santarpanottha
Vikaras (disease due to over calories) in Ayurveda. Medodushti (disorders of fat metabolism)
may be one of the risk factors for Ischemic Heart Disease (IHD).
Causes
1. Sedentary lifestyle
2. Excessive and frequent intake of food.
3. Excessive intake of oily, sweet, cold, heavy food items.
4. Lack of physical activity / exercise.
5. Day sleeping.
6. Children of obese parents are likely to be obese.
7. Mental worries and exhaustive mental activities.
Symptoms
1. Breathlessness even on little exertion / physical activity.
2. Lack of interest in doing work.
3. Profuse sweating with foul body odor.
4. Excessive hunger.
5. Feeling of tiredness.
6. Excessive sleep.
Preventive Measures as per Ayurveda
Pathya (Do’s ,)
1. Intake of regular and balanced diet.
2. Use of lukewarm water ( Ushnodaka) for drinking.
3. Use of Barley (Yava), Sorghum (Jowara), Indian gooseberry (Amla),Old Honey ( Mad.hu) 
and defatted Butter milk ( Takra)
4. Use of Green gram (Moong), Horse gram ( Kulathi), Bengal gram ( Ghana) and Spilt Red 
Gram (Arhar)
5. Plenty of green leafy vegetables and fruits
6. Fibrous food items
7. Brisk walking and jogging in fresh air every day in early morning
I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders20

[p.26] 8. Regular exercise, physical activity
9. Worrying
10. Practice of Yoga & Naturopathy in consultation with a specialist 
Apathy a (Don’ts)
1. Frequent and excessive intake of oily / heavy food items(Guru-snigdhaatisevana )
2. Sleeping in day time (Diva-swapna)
3. Sleeping immediately after taking meals
4. Canned food products
5. Sedentary lifestyle ( Asyasukham ).
6. Junk food like burger, pizza, cold drinks and fried food items
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders | 21

[p.27] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
7. Diet Chart for Vata Prakriti Purush
Meal/ time Menu Quantity
Nuts - Almond 6-7
Early morning Walnuts 1-2
Lemon tea / Green Tea/ Light tea with milk 1 cup (200 ml.approx.)
Breakfast
Fruits- Apple/Anar/ Banana
Daliya /Cornflakes / poha / upma / oat meal
Milk and milk products 250 ml
1 nos.
1 bowl
Idli / dosa
2-3 nos.
Roti
Boiled Brown rice with starch
2-3 nos 
1 bowl
Lunch
Green vegetable (Lauki,Tinda, Torai, 
cabbage, Spinach etc.)
Mudga Dal (Preferably whole legume)
1 bowl
Takra (Butter milk) or Skimmed Curd
1 bowlApple/Anar/ any citrus fruit
Evening Fruits-,Papaya, Guava ,Pineapple lnos./ bowl
Roasted chana /Dhokala 1 Bowl
Roti /Missi roti 1-2 nos
Dinner
Green vegetable (Lauki,Tinda, Torai, 
cabbage,Methi,Bathua ,Carrot,Spinach etc.)
Paneer /Dal
1 bowl
Salad (Carrot, Tomato, cucumber, Ginger, 
Amalaki etc). 1 bowl
Bed Time Milk 1-250 .
22 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.28] Ill I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
8. Diet Chart for Pitta Prakriti Purush
Meal/ time Menu Quantity
Nuts - Almond 6-7 nos.
Early Khaijura 1-2 nos.
morning
Milk /Coconut Water 1 cup (200-250 ml)
Fruit: Banana /Apple 1 bowl
Breakfast Daliya with milk/ 6poha/ upama
Idali/dosa 3 /I nos
Roti 2-3 nos
Boiled Brown rice with starch 1 bowl
Lunch Green vegetable (Lauki,Tinda, Torai, cabbage, 1 bowl
cauliflower, broccoli,Spinach etc.) 
Dal (Preferably whole legume) 
Skimmed Curd 1 bowl
Fruits- Apple/Anar/ any citrus fruit,Papaya, lnos
Evening
Guava,Pineapple
Roasted cereals - Roasted chana / com etc. 1 Bowl
Dhokala / murmurachat 2 nos/1 bowl
Roti /Missi roti 1-2 nos
Dinner Green vegetable (Lauki,Tinda, Torai, cabbage, 1 bowl
Spinach etc.) 1 bowl
Paneer /Dal 1 bowl
Bed Time Milk with Mishri / Khand 200-250 ml.
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders | 23

[p.29] 9 . Diet Chart for Kapha Prakriti Purush
Meal/ time Menu Quantity
Early Nuts - Almonds 6-7 nos.
morning Walnuts l-2os.
Honey Lemon with warm water / coffee / 
lemon tea
1 cup
Breakfast Fruits- Apple/Anar/ any citrus fruit 1 nos.
Besancheela / Vegetable stuffed Roti / 
Cornflakes with milk / poha/ upama 1 bowl
Idali/ dosa 3/1 nos.
Lunch Roti / missi roti /multi grain roti 2-3 nos
Boiled Brown rice with starch 1 bowl
Green vegetable (Lauki,Tinda, Torai, cabbage, 
Methi, Bathua,Spinach etc.)
1 bowl
Paneer /Dal - Chana and mudga dal (Preferably 
whole legume) 1 bowl
Evening Fruits- Apple, Anar, any citrus fruit,Papaya, 
Guava,Pineapple
lnos./ bowl
Roasted chana /Dhokala / murmura chat 
Tea / Coffee
1 Bowl / 2 nos. 
1 cup
Dinner Roti /Missi roti 1-2 nos
Green vegetable (Lauki,Tinda, Torai, cabbage, 
Methi, Bathua, Spinach etc.)
1 bowl
Paneer /Dal 1 bowl
Bed Time Milk without sugar 200-250 ml.
24 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.30] References
1. Srikanth N. Haripriya N., Singh Renu, Manjula ,Tewari Devesh, Diabetes Mellitus 
(Madhumeha) And Ayurvedic Management: An Evidence Based Approach, World 
Journal Of Pharmacy And Pharmaceutical Sciences, Volume 4, Issue 08, 881-892.
2. Rao TP, Sakaguchi N, Juneja LR, Wada E, Yokozawa T (2005). “Amla (Emblica 
officinalis Gaertn.) extracts reduce oxidative stress in streptozotocin-induced diabetic 
rats”. JMed Food. 8 (3): 362-8.
3. Bhattacharya, A.; Chatteijee, A.; Ghosal, S.; Bhattacharya, S. K. (1999). “Antioxidant 
activity of active tannoid principles of Emblica officinalis (amla)”. Indian journal of 
experimental biology. 37 (7): 676-680.
4. Habib-ur-Rehman, Yasin KA, Choudhary MA; et al. (Jul 2007). “Studies on the 
chemical constituents of Phyllanthus emblica”. Nat. Prod. Res. 21 (9): 775-81. Yadav, 
A. K. (1999). Phalsa: A Potential New Small Fruit for Georgia, pp.348-352 in: Janick, 
J. (ed.). Perspectives on new crops and new uses.
5. Govindachari, TR; Premila MS (1983). “Some alkaloids from Aegle 
marmelos”. Phytochem. 22. 3: 755-757.
6. Sharma, BR; Rattan RK; Sharma P (1981). “ Marmeline, an alkaloid, and other 
components of unripe fruits of Aegle marmelos”. Phytochem. 20. 11: 2606— 2607.
7. Mathew George*, Lincy Joseph, Sreelakshmi R (2016) Evaluation of Antidepressant 
and Antianxiety activity of Ethanolic leaf extract of Aegle marmelos , Vol. 6 (1)| 012- 
014
8. Gonzalez CA, Sala N, Rokkas T (2013). “Gastric cancer: epidemiologic 
aspects”. Helicobacter. 18 (Supplement 1): 34— 38.
9. Singh, R. P.; Chidambara Murthy, K. N.; Jayaprakasha, G. K. (2002). “Studies on the 
Antioxidant Activity of Pomegranate (Punicagranatum) Peel and Seed Extracts Using in 
Vitro Models”. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 50 (1): 81-6.
10. K. K. Jindal; R. C. Sharma (2004). Recent trends in horticulture in the Himalayas. Indus 
Publishing. ... bark of tree and rind of fruit is commonly used in ayurveda ... also used 
for dyeing...
11. Negi, P. S.; Jayaprakasha, G. K.; Jena, B. S. (2003). “Antioxidant and antimutagenic 
activities of pomegranate peel extracts”. Food Chemistry. 80 (3): 393.
12. Singh KK, Mridula D, Rehal J, Bamwal P (2011). “Flaxseed: a potential source of food, 
feed and fiber”. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr. 51 (3): 210-22.
13. Chen, Z-Y. “Oxidative stability of flaxseed lipids during baking”. Journal of the 
American Oil Chemists’ Society. 71: 629— 632.
14. Vaughn, A. R.; Branum, A; Sivamani, R. K. (2016). “Effects of Turmeric (Curcuma 
longa) on Skin Health: A Systematic Review of the Clinical Evidence”. Phytotherapy 
Research. 30 (8): 1243-64.
15. Daily, J. W.; Yang, M; Park, S (2016). “Efficacy of Turmeric Extracts and Curcumin for
1 INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI
25Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.31] Alleviating the Symptoms of Joint Arthritis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis 
of Randomized Clinical Trials”. Journal of Medicinal Food. 19 (8): 717-29.
16. Nagpal M, Sood S (2013). “Role of curcumin in systemic and oral health: An 
overview”. J Nat Sci Biol Med. 4 (1): 3-7Srinivasan K (2007). “Black pepper and its 
pungent principle-piperine: a review of diverse physiological effects”. Crit Rev Food 
Sci Nutr. 47 (8): 735^8.
17. Jayaprakasha, G. K.; Rao, L. J. (2011). “Chemistry, biogenesis, and biological activities 
of Cinnamomumzeylanicum”. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 51 (6): 
547-6
18. Ried K, Toben C, Fakler P (May 2013). “Effect of garlic on serum lipids: an updated 
meta-analysis”. Nutrition Reviews. 71 (5): 282-99.
19. Rohner, Andres; Ried, Karin; Sobenin, Igor A.; Bucher, Heiner C.; Nordmann, Alain 
J. (1 March 2015). “A systematic review and meta-analysis on the effects of garlic 
preparations on blood pressure in individuals with hypertension”. American Journal of 
Hypertension. 28 (3): 414— 423.
20. Marx, WM; Teleni L; McCarthyAL; Vitetta L; McKavanagh D; Thomson D; Isenring E. 
(2013). “Ginger (Zingiberofficinale) and chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a 
systematic literature review”. Nutr Rev. 71 (4): 245-54.
21. Daily, James W.; Zhang, Xin; Kim, Da Sol; Park, Sunmin (2015-12-01). “Efficacy 
of Ginger for Alleviating the Symptoms of Primary Dysmenorrhea: A Systematic 
Review and Meta-analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials”. Pain Medicine (Malden, 
Mass.). 16 (12): 2243-2255.
22. Iacobellis, Nicola S.; et al. (2005). “Antibacterial Activity of Cuminumcyminum L. and 
Carumcarvi L. Essential Oils”. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 53 (1): 
57-61.
23. Gong, J; Fang, K; Dong, H; Wang, D; Hu, M; Lu, F (2 August 2016). “Effect of 
Fenugreek on Hyperglycaemia and Hyperlipidemia in Diabetes and Prediabetes: a 
Meta-analysis”. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 194: 260-268.
24. Pappachan MJ. Increasing prevalence of lifestyle diseases: high time for action. Indian 
J Med Res. 2011;134:143-5. [PMC free article] [PubMed]
25. Datta Chakrapani,CharakaSamhita Ayurveda Deepika commentary:Sutrasthana 28/45, 
Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan,Varanasi, India. (1994)
26. Vaidya: Lai Chandra, Astanga Hridaya Sarvanga Sundari Tika commentary Sutra 13/25, 
Motilal Banarasi Das Varanasi, India. (1963)
27. Traditional Systems of Medicine for Primary Health care: Training Manual for 
Paramedics and other Health care Providers„CCRAS2008-2009
28. Datta Chakrapani,CharakaSamhita Ayurveda Deepika commentary:Sutrasthana 5/7, 
Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan, Varanasi, India. (1994)
29. Yadavji Trikamji (edtr) Dalhana, Sushruta Samhita, Nibandhasangraha,: Sutra 46/465- 
466, Chaukhamba Orientalia,Varanasi, India. (1980)
I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I INI I III I INI I INI I
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders26

[p.32] ■Illlllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
30. Vaidya: Lai Chandra, Astanga Hridaya Sarvanga Sundari Tika commentary Sutra 7/44, 
Motilal Banarasi Das Varanasi, India. (1963)
31. Vaidya Pt. Lalchand Shastri, Ashtanga Sangraha Hindi commentary (vol 1): Sutra Sthana 
9/4, Baidyanath Ayurved Bhavanpvt. Ltd, Kolkata, India. (1965)
32. Datta Chakrapani, Charaka Samhita Ayurveda Deepika commentary Vimanasthana 
1/24-25:, Chaukhamba Sanskrit Sansthan,, Varanasi, India(1994)
33. Sharma A. K. Jain Avinash, Jain, Seema, Kayachikitsa, Part II, chapter 9/118, 122,136 
Chaukhamba Orientalia,, Varanasi, India(2008)
34. Draft guidelines & training manual forlntegration of AYUSH (Ayurveda) with national 
program for prevention and control of cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and stroke 
(NPCDCS), CCRAS, Ministry of AYUSH, Govt, of India, New Delhi in collaboration 
with, Directorate General of Health Services,Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, 
Govt, of India
35. Agnivesha, Charaka, Dridhabala, Charaka Samhita, Sutra Sthana, Ashtauninditeeya 
Adhyaya, 21/3.5th ed. VaidyaJadavajiTrikamji Aacharya, editor. Varanasi: Chaukhamba 
Sanskrit Sansthan; 2009. p. 116
Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders | 27

[p.33] Illllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll
Experts Involved in Development of Guidelines and Consultative Process
Chief Editor
Prof. Vaidya K. S. Dhiman
Director General | Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences | New Delhi 
Executive Editor 
Dr.N.Srikanth
Deputy Director General | Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences | New Delhi 
Associate Editors 
Dr.Bharti
Assistant Director (Ayu.) | Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences | New Delhi 
Dr.Babita Yadav
Research Officer (Ayu.) | Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases |New 
Delhi
Contributors for content development
1. Dr. B. C. S. Rao
Assistant Director (Ayu.) | Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences | New Delhi
2. Dr. Seema Jain
Research Officer (Ayu.) | Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases |New 
Delhi
3. Dr. Jai Prakash Ram
Research Officer (Ayu.) | Central Ayurveda Research Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases |New 
Delhi
Members of National Consultation
1. Dr. R.H.Singh
Emeritus Scientist, Varanasi|
2. Prof. Murlikrishna
PG Dept, of Panchkarma| S.V.Ayurvedic College |Tirupati
28 Ayurveda based Diet and Life Style Guidelines for Prevention of Cardiac Disorders

[p.34] CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES
Ministry of AYUSH (Government of India)
Jawahar Lai Nehru Bhartiya Chikitsa Evam Homeopathy Anusandhan Bhawan, 
No. 61-65, Institutional Area, Opp. “D” Block, Janakpuri, New Delhi-110058 
Tele.: 91-11-28524457, Fax: 91-11-28520748 
Email: dg-ccras@nic.in, Website : www.ccras.nic.in
Printed at: J.K. Offset Graphics (P) Ltd., New Delhi
