TITLE: Abdominal Strength and Core Conditioning
SOURCE: Georges St-Pierre RUSHFIT — DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Rushfit Abdominal Strength and Core Conditioning Dvd.avi
RELEASE YEAR: 2010
DURATION: 1:40:50
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] If you want to be a champion, you need to train like one. Let's go, George. We have 15 seconds. Let's pump it out, okay? Yeah! I'm George St. Pierre. Welcome to the abdominal strength and core conditioning workout. Pump those legs, George. You gotta push hard. Great. Strength not only comes from the bicep, it comes from the hips. Five, four, three, two, one. This is your chance to train with me, George St. Pierre. Hi, everyone.

[01:08] I'm George St. Pierre. Welcome to my Rush Fit Warmup. This program has been designed by Eric Owens. The Rush Fit Warmup is a multifaceted warmup that uses only bodyweight motions and allows you to work every muscle of your body in a functional manner to get you ready for the work to come and the rounds. So let's not waste too much time, guys. Let's go and get started here with a shoulder width stance, and we're just going to do some torso twist. So as you notice, I want to get my elbows up about shoulder height. I can dip down a little bit. That's okay. And I pick a good pivot point on the ground. I want to rotate back and forth. Imagine that my elbows, if there's a line, just about going about 180 degrees. If there's a sphere here, right? I don't want to go too far. I don't want to go all the way around here. I don't want to injure myself. Because remember, we're just warming up. We're trying to get the body loose, core temperature up so we don't injure ourselves, and we're ready for the work to come. Nobody is like an elastic. If you try to stress an elastic when it's cold, it's going to snap.

[02:12] If you try to stretch it when it's warm, now you're going to be able to feel with it. Now we're doing each exercise for 60 seconds. So right now we have about 10 seconds left, and then we're going to switch and go into our next exercise, which is a side bend. Let's keep going though, guys. We have about five seconds. All right, good job. So now here in our stance, we're just going to lean to one side, kicking our hip out, reaching over, then going to the other side. This is a side bend, and what we don't want to do is we don't want to bend forward and then over. We want to keep our body stacked, meaning knee, hip, shoulder, everything in alignment. We let the hip kick out to the side and we reach. This is going to be stretching the muscles of the hips and of the lats, and this is a very important movement pattern in most functional fitness and in fighting. You have to be able to move side to side as well as forward and backwards. Like every other exercise, you start slowly and you try to pick it up as time goes on. Now we have about 20 seconds left in this.

[03:14] You can also work at your own rate. If you find you're starting to fatigue, the form is starting to go away, step back, maybe take a few deep breaths to get back at it. One more seconds, guys. Warm up is very important. It prevents injuries and it allows us to have our full range of motion. Okay, great job. Now let's turn and face this direction and we're going to come down onto our fingers, walking out into the plank position and we're going to walk our feet up to our hands. We need to turn, switch directions and go back in the other direction. This is a great way to stretch all the muscles on the backside of the body. We're also activating the core. We're starting to get things a little bit. The difficulty is increasing here now. So you might find that your body temperature is increasing. That's good. You should be starting to sweat. Apply around this point, maybe within a couple more exercises. The difficulty, the complexity is going to increase. One of the things you might notice, so Victoria, if you can, let's do a modification. Let's do a bent knee modification. So Victoria happens to have great flexibility, but if her flexibility wasn't so good, she's

[04:15] going to come up like this. She's going to kind of tuck under and she's going to lower down with a bent knee position. She's going to allow her to get down there on the ground, walk herself out. And she walks her feet up. She'll also do it in a bent knee position. Great job, Victoria. Okay, about five more seconds, guys. Let's try to get one more. Okay, now up in standing, we're going to take a move from Capoedo. Okay, we're going to do the ginga. We're going to go side to side. So it's like a backward lunge. We bring one hand in front. So yeah, your defending hand up a little bit higher towards, come up in front of the face. And we go side to side. This is a great move. Lv up to the witty. This is a backward lunge. We go side to side and Capoedo has some very effective techniques. And this is when the base moves up Capoedo. I'm sure none of us are very good at it, but still a fun exercise and it's a great variation of a lunge. Capoeira, it's a martial art from Brazil. It's also a style of dancing. Yeah. And this is one of their base motions. It's a great way to warm up with the body.

[05:16] We've been back and forth. We have the coordination here. We're lunging back with one leg and then back with the other. About 10 more seconds to go here and then we're going to do our walk out push up. So five, four, three, two, one. Okay. Now here, shoulder with stance. We're going to lower down squatting. We're going to walk out to the full push up position. Hands underneath the shoulders. Lower down, then come back up. Try to stress getting a full range of motion here. So you squat all the way down. Get your hands on the ground. You walk out to get your hands underneath your shoulders. You don't want them far back. You don't want them too far forward. A good alignment. Lower down, chest to the deck. Press all the way up and back in the standing. Okay. Now we're about halfway into it guys. So 30 more seconds. And you'll notice as when they come back up into the standing position, we want to make sure our heels get on the ground before we stand up. And let's check out Victoria's form here. So if you start to fatigue a little bit, it's okay to lower down your knees.

[06:19] It's also okay to restrict your range of motion if necessary. If you can't lower all the way down, what you don't want to have happen is lead with your head or collapse in the core. You want to keep the core activated at all times. Maintain good alignment. Ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Okay. Now back in the standing guys. We're going to come here, feet together and lateral lunges going side to side. Try to imagine your feet are running on parallel lines here. We don't want our toes pointing too far out or too far in. When we take our step out too, we want to sit back into our heel. Notice how the trail leg stays straight. The lead leg is the leg that bends. The hands raise up as a counter balance. And that's also activating the muscles in the shoulders. Giving us a full body warm up. Remember functional training is about using all muscles of the body, not just one or two. Halfway there guys. And if you notice they're not working at a breakneck speed. The speed is enough to make sure that they're working. But yet this isn't really a workout yet. This is a warm up. We're just getting the body warm and loose. If you're finding you're out of breath and you're about to pass out, you probably need

[07:21] to slow down a little bit and do a little bit less repetitions. Find your own speed and figure out what works for you. It's important to make the blood circulate everywhere in every muscle and every joint of our body to prevent injuries. It's very important. Okay. Now we're in our stance. Let's lower it down. We're going to walk out and we're going to do our push up with a lateral hold here. Okay. So we're going to come up a lateral plank. We lower down to the push up and back out. All right guys. Let's get on it. Walk out and once you get out into that push up position, you're going to maintain that push up position. So they're all the way down. You open up, you rotate. So notice how they rotate on their feet completely. They rotate. Now they hold a five second hold. They lower back down. Good. And if you find that a five second hold is not really challenging, try to hold it 10 seconds. Try to hold 20 seconds. Try to hold 30 seconds. Do the best you can. But five seconds usually does the trick. And the key is you don't want your core to sag.

[08:21] You want to keep your hips up in the air. That's going to activate your obliques. Now Victoria, when you lower it down, if you can't do a knee push up, so lower back down, up down to your knees. Then you're going to come up and then raise off your knees. Yeah. So that's totally acceptable. You can lower it down to your knees in order to do this. Okay. Excellent. Now let's walk back up into the standing position. And that's going to set you guys up in the perfect position for your air squat. Okay. So as you're here, you just want to lower down, thighs to parallel, hands up as a counter balance, come back into standing. All the way up, all the way down. Already start breaking a sweat now. That's a good thing. Now if you notice key things here, their knees aren't going too far forward. The knees initiate the motion, but then they start to sit back and down. They don't round here at the back and collapse to keep themselves up. If you start to collapse, you probably need to shorten your distance, shorten the depth of your squat. You want to push down to your heels. You want to activate all the muscles in the posterior chain, your hamstrings, your glutes,

[09:23] good core activation, proper alignment of the spine. And there again, you're not trying to do as many reps as possible. You're just trying to do good repetitions, full range of motion. About 15 more seconds. Reading is very important too. Inhale by the nose, exhale by the mouth. Okay, excellent work. Now let's walk out here, okay? And as we get down, we're going to get in the quadruped position, meaning I want my hands underneath my shoulders and I want my knees underneath my hips. A wide enough base so I have stability, but not too wide. Then I'm going to go opposite knee to elbow, extend, hold five, four, three, two, one. Then back in, we're going to stay on the same side. You're going to stay on the same side, everybody. So you're just going to switch opposite knee to opposite elbow. Three, two, one. Keep going and then out.

[10:23] Five, four, three, two, one. Two more times. Five, four, three, two, one. One more time. Five, four, three, two, one. Now let's switch sides. So get your stance in place, proper base, and go. Five, four, three, two, one. Five, four, three, two, one. Three more. Five, four, three, two, one. Two more. Five, four, three, two, one. One more. Five, four, three, two, one. Excellent work. Now let's come around to a lying position, lying face up. Okay. And now we're going to do our straight up. Okay. So we're pouring our toes back towards us, hands over head.

[11:25] We're going to try to sit straight up and touch the ceiling here. Okay. And then we're going to lower right back down, right when the hands touch, right back up. We're going to finish off with one minute of this, and that will complete our warm-up. Remember that this is not a race, this is just a warm-up. The importance of this is the form, and it's not the repetition. It's not the number of repetition. It's to be able to break a little bit of sweat and ready to go for a after, to be ready for a hard workout. That's a very good point, George. And if you notice, George is sweating. Everybody here is sweating. It's a difficult warm-up, but yet everybody's able to talk. Everyone's able to still interact. They're not to that point where they're filled with lactic acid. We're not working out yet. Just getting everything loose and ready. About 10 more seconds. Five more seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. Great job, everybody.

[12:27] That completes our warm-up, and now we're ready to attack the real workout. Congratulations, everyone. Hi, everyone. I'm George St. Pierre, and welcome to my abdominal strength and core conditioning workout. Eric Owing, who's the designer of this workout, will guide us through this. Okay, what we're going to do here is it's a workout that pretty much uses all of what we consider the core. But remember, the core also consists of our shoulder stabilizers, our glute muscles. It has to do with pretty much everything throughout the body. I mean, we have stabilization throughout. So just don't think of only abdominals. Recognize that we're also using our back extensors, our obliques, transverse abdominals, our rectus abdominals, that six-pack muscle. We're using all of these muscles. And it's a round system. So the first round is, they're all difficult. You might find one a little bit easier than the other, but by the end, you should be completely fatigued. We're going to try to hit every single muscle in your core and give you a great workout.

[13:28] So starting with round number one, let's everybody go and grab a dumbbell. Okay, we're just going to grab one dumbbell. We're going to come into stance here, okay? So let's go ahead and, I'm having my stopwatch here. So let's go ahead and bring it over to our left hand, all right? And we're going to remember we're going to balance on our right foot. So it's going to be one leg squats, okay, to start off. So left foot's up in the air. We're going to squat with our right leg. Starting round one, go. So squatting down, then standing up. You want to try to stabilize each time you come up. And your nose, your body wants to kick out when it does that. You have to use, there again, this is your core to stabilize your system. If that's a little bit difficult, you can tap down your toe each time and try to keep doing it and tap. And if necessary, too, you can just put your foot back here. And this is a much easier variation, but totally acceptable. We're going to try to do this for 30 seconds. Then we're going to switch sides. Okay, guys, three more seconds. And standing up, let's switch hands and switch legs. So now on the right hand on the left leg, one leg squats here, going down and coming up.

[14:28] If you need to do a toe tap, that's okay. And if you need to keep your foot on the ground, totally acceptable. 15 seconds. Guys, you're doing great. Five, four, three, two, one. Okay, coming into the standing position, let's come forward here and grab our other weight. So you're going to pick up both weights into your hand. You're going to come into this position right here, okay, like a quarter curl. And we're going to rotate doing an uppercut. Imagine you have an opponent that's about your same height and you're trying to hit him right in the chin. And notice how they cause a little dip when they come down and they sort of extend up. Remember the uppercut strength not only comes from the bicep, it comes from the hips. And so what you notice throughout this core conditioning workout is we're using the whole body, one functional unit. That's a theme that you're going to hear time and time and time again.

[15:31] Anything that's functional uses your whole body. So although our obliques are getting a lot of the work, we're also using our legs, our arms, our shoulders, our lats. Almost everything's involved in this motion. Okay, great job guys, almost there. Let's go five, four, three, two, one. Now set one dumbbell down guys, okay. And now you're going to bring one dumbbell down to the ground with you. Line down in this position. We're going to keep the dumbbell extended with both hands. And we're going to sit up and lower down. Go straight up, try to come all the way up and lower down. If you find at home, you're having a tough time doing this, you can just do an abdominal crunch, lifting your shoulders off the ground and coming down. And we're going to do this for one minute guys. You guys are doing excellent. Just keep going up and down. Try to go straight up, you want to touch the ceiling if you can.

[16:33] Try to breathe out when you hit that sticking point. You hit that point where you feel like you've sort of hit the wall. Try to breathe out and push up, almost there. We've got five more seconds. Let's go three, two, one. Now you're going to let the dumbbell down to the side and we're done with the dumbbell. Now you can do a slight bend in the knees. We're going to put our palms up and we're going to do a lying rotation, trying to touch down. You don't want to bend the knees too much unless you need to. And the variation if you're having a tough time is this. Notice how my legs are very bent and I'm going side to side. I want to look opposite of the way my legs are going, but if I can, I want to go to my legs as straight as possible. It's a little bend in the knees, moving side to side. And then inside the side. That's it guys. We have about 20 more seconds.

[17:34] Going straight through. Let's get through this. I know it's hard, it's painful, I'm almost done. 10 more seconds now guys. Try to keep breathing. Okay, five, four, three, two, one. Now we're going into the bicycle and I'll start slow because we have a minute here, okay? So it's going side to side. Trying to touch opposite knee to opposite elbow. Your abs should be on fire right now. I confirm. Opposite knee, opposite elbow. It's sort of similar like when you're on the ground, you're doing an up kick. Sort of the same type of mechanic. You have to use your whole body here. Going side to side. Now if you find that this is becoming too difficult, now guys, we have 25 seconds. Try to keep going, but if this is too difficult, you can do like a march, okay? Like this, where you touch your foot down and come up.

[18:34] But try to keep going guys. Now we have 15 seconds. Let's pump it out, okay? 15 seconds. Let's go George. Eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Okay guys, that's round one. I'm sure your abs are feeling it. Feeling all right George? Yes. I think he's lost for words. Okay guys. I lost my word because I'm in pain, but I'm doing well. So that's the first one. So if you notice we're using some motions that aren't typically considered core motions. We're doing like these squats, okay? We have with dumbbells in our hands, but all of this is necessary. And the main thing if you notice we're trying to keep the body aligned. We're not throwing the uppercut and letting our whole body sway. That's the whole idea of core condition. We need a strong core to keep us stabilized and allow us to move. So we're going to kind of build upon that principle in round two. So we're also going to use a dumbbell here, just one dumbbell, okay? So let's everybody grab our dumbbell and get ready.

[19:35] We're going to start with the right hand and we're going to be in stance here. Okay. So with the dumbbell right here in the middle, we're going to do what's called a dumbbell swing. All right. So to start off round two, it's going to be a dumbbell swing, then a dumbbell wood chop, then we're going to go down to the ground, right? We're going to go right and left. Let's get ready now and go one minute of dumbbell swings going all the way up and down. And remember it's more of your legs doing this. You're pushing your heels down to the ground and your arms more or less guide in the weight. Your core has to activate in order to stabilize your body from collapsing over. It's not out, not the shoulder that is working everyone. The core, keep the core, keep the core tight, push with the hips and the leg down to the floor. You guys doing great, about 25 more seconds. And notice how their bodies don't deviate. They stay right down the straight line. You want to imagine your chin's going through your belly button in a straight line.

[20:36] It's going to pike you into the ground. That's how you would look. 10 more seconds now, okay? Let's go guys. Five, four, three, two, one. Now we're going to grab here, okay, with our left hand palm facing up with our right hand and we're going to do the wood chop. So we're going to come here and up at a diagonal angle, okay? And notice how the body doesn't collapse. We're not folding over like this. We're maintaining our body in a good position. The legs do a little bit of bending. Going at that diagonal and down on the diagonal. If necessary, if you want to lighten up a little bit, you can put a little bend in the arms, but it's best to keep the arms straight. Keep the arms moving around the body. Rotating on the balls of your foot. Big rotation. Great guys, about 20 more seconds. George, try to come a little bit more up at the angle here if you can. Yes, sir.

[21:37] Good. Nice, Lisa. Good iron. Okay guys, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Now switch hands over to the left hand side, right back to our swing, okay? Going straight overhead. Remember, keep that chin and line with your belly button. Using your legs here, okay? Don't think the core is only abdominals. It's also the glutes. It's the legs. It's the hips. It's the muscle that stabilizes the shoulders, the spine up top, everything. Make sure you don't round your back on the way down. Keep your back, your back arch and tight. Not this guys, there's no looking down here. So say, a way to make sure that doesn't happen is notice everybody's looking straight out. That's very important. Don't look down. You come down with the legs. And when you come up, push your heels into the ground that activates all the muscles here in the backside of the body, okay? About 15 seconds.

[22:40] Let's pick it up now guys. 10 seconds, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Now left palm facing up, cup with the right hand. We're going to rotate and the woodchop on the other side. Going side to side. Try to imagine a half of a circle here, okay? At a diagonal going in this direction, just like this. Remember it's all of these muscles of the core, what we call the core that stabilize the body, that keep the body, that give us posture so we just don't collapse over. If you find that you're collapsing over, if you find that you can't maintain this good alignment, set your weight down, take a little breather, come back and start up again. You can even pause the video if you wanted to. That's totally fine. All right guys, 15 seconds. They're going to be down on the ground. Last exercise, last 15 seconds. Let's finish it around.

[23:41] We have a great afternoon. No, no, we actually have one more exercise, George. Sorry buddy. We're going down on the floor after this, okay? So we have five, four, three, two, one. Everybody grab your other dumbbell, okay? And we're going down here on the ground. And do the prone position. We're going to do the prone one-arm side press, okay? Like that. So we're going to start going to the right. Ready and go. You're going to hold up your five, four, three, two, one. Lower down to the mat. Rotate and press up. Five, four, three, two, one. And down, open to the right. Now, one of the most important things here is that when you're holding up there, try to, you can look up at the weight if you want, but I prefer you look straight out each time. And also, don't let the hips sag. We don't want this happening, okay? We want this. We want the lifts. We want to activate the obliques. That whole frontal muscular system, those muscles on the side of the body, they're very important.

[24:42] Come on guys, 10 more seconds. Let's finish strong. One more time on the other side. Open to the left. Hold five, four, three, two, one. Excellent work. Okay, that brings it into round two. Yes, sir. How do you feel, okay? I'm ready to attack the round three. All right, good. Now, round three is going to be more on the ground. It's kind of more familiar exercises, okay? We're doing sit-ups. We're doing leg raises. We're doing V-ups. We're doing glute bridges, okay? So we're staying on the same theme of we're using our abdominal muscles. We're using our obliques. We're using everything, all right? It might seem a little bit easier, but you'll find that it's nice to get the body a little break because rounds four and five are very difficult. Round three is difficult, but it's not that bad. You guys are going to get through it, okay? We don't need the dumbbell for that one. We don't need any dumbbells. This is all body weight, okay? So we can move our dumbbells to the side. And if you guys want, we can just lie down here. And I'm going to show you guys real quick. You don't, we still have 15 seconds, okay? So don't be in a rush. Just, just kind of check me out. When I do my sit-up, I'm not going slow. I'm trying to, like I'm throwing a ball in front of me.

[25:44] I'm kind of sitting up. And notice how I come all the way up there, right? So that's our first exercise. We have our sit-up, then our right glute bridge, and we'll keep going. I'll call them out to you guys, okay? Let's get ready. And beginning round three, power sit-ups. Let's go. Try to explode up. Use momentum. Drive your elbow down towards your hip, okay? George, so drive your elbow down to your hip. Yeah, there you go. Use that momentum to bring me up. Yes, sir. Good. Nice sign. Nice lease-up. Five more seconds. Now, from here, let's lie down here. Right leg bent, left leg straight. Glute bridge, okay? Lifting up with the hips. Now you try to hold here if you can. We want to try to keep our thighs even, okay? Like parallel. Now, if you notice you start to fatigue, you can lower down. There's nothing wrong with that. I find that I tap into my hamstrings and glutes fire really hard. I tend to even cramp a little here. So if that's the case, you can come up and lower down. If you can maintain it for the full 30, that's awesome.

[26:45] You guys have five, four, three, two, one. Excellent. Now, a slight bend in the knees. Palms down. We're going to do our leg raises, okay? Not a big bend in the knees. You just want to tap your heel and go. But a slight bend. That leaves some pressure on your spine. It makes it a little bit easier. 10 more seconds. We're going to go back through all this again. All right, guys, just keep going. Remember to breathe, everyone. Breathing is the key. Okay, now, lying flat. Left leg bent. Left glute bridge, okay? Coming up. Keep the spine neutral. We're not jamming the lower back. So the abs are contracting a little bit. The glutes contracting. The hamstrings contracting. Like I said, if necessary to touch down and come back up, that's okay. Try to stay up if possible. Doing great, guys.

[27:46] Five, four, three, two, one. Arms over head. Slight bend in the knees. We're bringing our legs up and touch our toes. We have a V up now, okay? So bringing the legs up. If you guys notice, George's doing a little bit harder variation, which is fine. He's actually going on touching his toes. Not when they're up here, but actually when they're out there. The further out your toes are, the more difficult it is. You have to come all the way up. But you can go back and do it the other way. You're doing it the other way. George, either way is fine. Yes, sir. That's a tougher variation. And that's great. You can do it. Get after it. Okay, guys. Now, right back down, okay? We're starting over again. Power sit-ups all the way up. Now, I'm going to make a little variation for you guys at home. If you're having a tough time with the sit-up now, we can switch to an abdominal crunch. I mean, I'm just bringing my shoulders off the ground and coming up. I would like to see this. But if you can't get that, just raise the shoulders up and lower down. Almost there now.

[28:46] Five, four, three, two, one. Left leg straight, right leg bent. We have our glute bridge, okay? Trying to lift up there, driving down to that heel, activating the glutes. You know, guys, the glute muscles are the strongest muscles in the body. If they're not firing properly, your core's not functioning properly. You're going to get hurt also. Yeah, you lose your power. You lose everything. You guys are doing great. You have five more seconds now. Five, four, three, two, one. Leg raises, okay? Palms down, raising the legs right up here. Try to tap the heel and go. Tap the heel and go. 15 seconds. That's when it starts to really burn. Oh, yeah. Yeah, very uncomfortable. Yeah, guys, you're almost there. Almost finished now. Let's go through it.

[29:46] Come on, five seconds. Let's wrap out, okay? Let's go. Three, two, one. Right leg straight, left leg bent, left glute bridge, okay? Let's go. Right up and lift. George, lower down that right thigh a little bit. There you go. Good. Try to push down to the left heel, okay? Really feeling the glutes, the hamstrings, and we're going to keep those abs contracted. If you hit the wall, let's just get through it. Everything is mental from here. You guys, five seconds and three, two, one. V-ups, okay? Let's go. Get after it if you can. This is it. The last exercise for this round, okay? Come on, George. Let's go, buddy. Come on, Ion. Lisa, get after it. That's it. 15 seconds now. Let's go. 10, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.

[30:53] All right. Great job. So that's the end of round three, and I'm sure your abs are probably killing it now. Probably everything else is starting to fatigue. Now, this is where it's what we call these rounds, George, coming up. Championship round. And there's a reason you're going to feel it, okay? Coming up, what we have going on here now is it's two rounds, and there's three exercises, but they happen to be very difficult exercises, right, guys? I'm going to show you what's going on here, and then we're just going to get right into it. So don't let the static nature of this round fool you. This is very difficult, okay? So we're doing an opposites drill. Now, we're going to do the opposites where we come up here, okay? And this stance, but if necessary, you can do it from the kneeling stance. That's perfectly okay. We're going to do five second holds, okay? And as you're holding those, you can go a little bit longer at home. It feels like, hey, after two minutes, it's a piece of cake, but I think five second holds each side are going to be plenty for everybody, okay? Believe me, you're going to have enough. Okay, let's go and get down in the position. And two minutes, guys, going to the opposites, starting with

[31:55] the left leg and the right hand, and we're going to try to hold out there, okay? Touch and go. Five, four, three, two, one. Hands down and switching to the other side. And don't be in a rush to switch, guys. Remember, we have plenty of time. We don't have to be, you know, flying through it. The whole idea is it's stability. And you'll see there are tendencies to want to, for their bodies to tilt. That's because their cores are fatigued. So we're trying to fight the lift up here a little bit, okay? Using the muscles back here around, our traps, the erector muscles. And if you start to fatigue too much, remember, guys, we can always lower down to the knees. We have to fight to keep it up there. Good. And then just keep switching. That's it. And you guys will find too, it's very necessary as we switch in and out of these positions that come down to a wide base. If our base is too narrow, we'll collapse, okay? Hey, guys, they're halfway there. If you feel necessary, you can do the variation of going down your knees.

[32:56] If you're feeling good, try to keep pushing through. Try to lift back up in here. Good. Yes, that's what makes you want to put your hand down. That's the body fatiguing, guys. Try to push though, okay? We're almost there. 45 seconds. George, you need to do a wider base, that's why you're collapsing. A little bit wider base. If you can get down to your knees, that's okay. Now, if you notice Lisa here, she's down on the knees and that's totally fine, okay? She's getting the same effect, it's just a little bit less intensity. That's totally acceptable. See George is having a tough time? I am having a tough time. So I'm sure you at home, you're probably having a tough time too, and that's totally okay, all right? That's what we want. This shouldn't be easy. It shouldn't be easy for anybody. 15 seconds now, guys. Let's finish strong. And then we're going to go into a lateral plank, okay? Put stabilize. Almost there. Five, four, three, two, one. In that same position, okay? Let's go now, guys. In position, in position, okay? Right here.

[33:56] Now we're going to open up to the right. Try to keep the hips up and hold. Five, four, three, two, one. Right hand down, open to the left. Hold five, four, three, two, one. Back to the right. Five, four, three, two, one. To the left. Five, four, three, two, one. Try to keep going, okay? Now, we're 40 seconds into this, and we're doing this for two minutes. So switching every five seconds. For some of you guys might, at home, let's say you have really strong cores, right? You might find this too easy. You can hold it 10 seconds, 15 seconds. You can hold one minute on one side and one minute on the other. And if you're doing that, if you're just holding one side, that's totally acceptable. And you're going to find right about now, you're halfway into it, and you can switch sides, okay? But alternating is probably the option a lot of you are going to go for,

[34:56] because this happens to be quite difficult. Now keep working, guys. You're doing a great job. And if you find at home that this is just too much for you, you can always do this variation, okay? We want to form this 90-degree angle here, and we just want to lift up. This still works. These muscles here on the side are our bleaks. This is working all the things in the frontal muscle system, okay? But what we're doing is just a less intense version. Just make sure at the halfway point, okay? We just switch, and we always go to the other side. You guys are doing great. Ugh! My body's feeling like that. I feel like my body want to collapse. Yep, that's what you want to feel. Remember, guys, we want to get those hips up the whole time. The hips have a tendency when they dip here. We don't want them to dip. We want to keep them up. The oblique muscles, okay? We want to feel right underneath here. Almost there now, guys. Let's go. Five, four, three, two, one. All right, excellent. Now, let's lie down. Ugh! We're going to do our straight-up exercise, okay? So we're just going to sit straight up and down.

[36:00] Straight up and down. Work at your own pace, okay? And here again, if you're having a tough time with this, let's say your core is wiped out, you can't do anything, you can just do it a basic abdominal crunch, either here or here with your hands. End up. And don't pull on the neck, okay? If you have to do a crunch, that's fine. You want to see this. But if you can't get that, try to get this. Last one, everyone. Let's go push it through. Okay, you guys are doing great. 20 seconds. Let's try to rep out now, okay? That's when you separate the adult from the kids right here. 10 seconds. I'm completely exhausted and I have time to make jokes. Can't believe it. And time. Okay, that brings an end to round four. So we have one more round, okay? We're going to come back to the next round. We have one more round, okay? That we're going to come back for. So that one's difficult. This next one's going to be the most difficult, okay?

[37:01] So I can promise you guys here, you're going to be hurting after this. I know. I'm having a hard time standing up right now. Just how bad it is. But I know that's what I need to get to what I want to accomplish in my career. So, and George, we have a few seconds. Would you say that core strength is probably one of the most important aspects of being a good fighter? Like you have? It is, you know? Because everything you do, you know, every time, let's say, I try to hit someone and someone might hit me in the same time, or it's a question of stability. And when your stability is good, you know, you have less chances to get hurt, to get injured at the same time. I'm a big believer that actually you'll hit me. And also what is important, let's say I kick, I punch. The energy is transferred from the ball of my, from the ball of my heel to my knuckle. If I have a good core strength, I have less waste of energy. My energy is not lost here. It connects the power, right? Exactly. It makes the connection better. It's like the bridge between the two.

[38:02] Absolutely. Alrighty, guys. So we went a little bit over there, but that's okay. I actually enjoyed listening to that. So our rest went a little bit longer. It's totally fine. Now let's go and get ready here, okay, for our back bend. Alright, so we're going to put our hands right up here by our head. We're going to get up on the balls of our feet, okay? And we're just going to drive up, pushing our palms down, and trying to hollow out there in the back. So you want to push your hips up high into the sky, okay? And we're holding here for 30 seconds. You're going to feel everything. This is working the whole posterior chain, okay? All the way. Every muscle in the backside of your body is working on this motion. This is quite difficult. After everything that you've done, you should have a tough time with this. And if you are having a tough time, it's totally acceptable to just a glute bridge, okay? You're still going to get a good effect, not the same effect, but a good one. Okay, guys, now let's lower down from our bridge. We're going to come right up here into the navasana position, okay? Straight legs, try to keep the chest up.

[39:02] If you're having a tough time, you can bend the knees a little bit, okay? And three, two, one. Here we go now. This is going to be a tough one. We're going to do our sit-through, okay, as we come back into this position. George, you need to push up your hands. That's fine. Now we're going to lower down into our push-up, our hindi push-up. We come back, and then we throw ourselves forward sitting through, right back into the navasana position, okay? Yeah, nothing wrong. We're doing a variation. The variation, guys, is going to be this, okay? And we come around. We're still hitting our push-up. Then we just come right back down the hip and swing around. Bent knee is the easier version. Straight legs, the harder version. If you notice, George has a hand boost. What that does, it gives you a little bit more to lift. Then you come back, then you put your hands down, push up, and then you come back up here onto your fist and come through. Just remember, guys, if you do that variation, that you have to really stabilize here. You don't want to roll your wrist.

[40:08] Yeah! That's where I need the harness exercise so far. That's just this stuff. That's why I put my fist on the ground to be able to pass my leg through. Yeah, you have to bend the knees there. That's totally okay. Great job, Lisa. Try to bend those legs a little bit higher. Yeah, about the eye, the eye line. Now, work at your own pace here, too, at home, okay? If you find you're going to do a few repetitions, that's fine. Hips up, George. There you go. All the way through. 15 more seconds now. This is the toughest one, right? Toughest one for the last one, just like in a fight. Okay, guys, now in this position, prone position, okay? We have our mountain climbers. Try to keep the hips even with the shoulders and with us pumping through, okay? Let's go. Get after it. Hips a little bit lower, George. There you go. Pump those legs. I know fatigue is setting in now, guys.

[41:09] This is when you've got to push hard. 15 seconds. There you go. Try to pump those legs, George. 10 seconds. Nice work. Lisa, butt a little bit lower. Okay, guys. Great job. Now, let's come back around, okay? Back into our back bend. Right here. Coming up. Get focused now. This is it. And up. The good news is on the transfer time there, guys. It cuts down the round a little bit, which is probably some good news. This is a very difficult exercise. Let's keep going. There we have five more seconds. Go on, George. Push it out, buddy. You're doing great. All right, lower down into nabasano, okay? So coming up, guys. No delay here now, okay? Let's go. I know you're tired. It's much easier for me. I'm just coaching you guys. For you guys, I know your muscles are burning and aching. But try to get there. If you have to bend the knees a little bit, that's okay.

[42:16] Good. Just take your time. Try to hold up there. Try to hold about five seconds in the nabasano position, okay? After you do that, try to sit up and remember, when we go through our sit-through, and look, I bring my knees up and in, I feel my head forward, and that's where I kick back. Lower down, come up. Then when I come back forward, right through. If I need to do the hand boost, that's fine. And if I need to do this variation of coming around on my hip, and then doing the push-up, that's fine. And even if I need to do the variation of this push-up, that's fine. I can hold off the knees. Plenty of variations to make this an exercise everybody can do. Well, George, I'm almost there now. Twenty more seconds here, okay? Okay, try to get two more reps in. Then we're going to finish off with the mountain climber, and then we're done with this workout, okay? Let's push through, guys. Almost there. Ten more seconds.

[43:17] Eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Flip it around. Prom position, mountain climbers. Let's get after it now, guys. Come on, this is it. Finish strong. Pump those legs. Hip slower, George. Pump those knees high, all the way back, all the way up. That's it. Come on, man. Let's go. Finish strong. Let's go. Lisa, hips lower. Hip slower. Keep the hips low. Hip slow. Last round, like your life is depending on it. Let's go. Ten seconds now. Push it out. That's it. Go. Let's go now. Five, four, three, two, one. Okay, everybody. Good job. What a workout. What a workout. All right, so great job, everyone. That brings it into round five and into the workout. And if you did all of this, I imagine you're probably pretty tired. You'll be ready for the cool down, okay? What do you think, though, George? What do you think about that workout? Well, Eric, tell you the truth. I like when my training is harder than my fight.

[44:18] If you train harder, your fight will be easier. It's the same thing for everyone in life. If you make your training harder in life, when you're going to have to go through some obstacle, it seems easier. So that's how I like to roll. That's how we roll in here. Thank you, everyone. Great workout. Congratulations. You went through this. That was a good workout. Super, everyone. Great job. Just finished a workout. Now it's time for the cool down. The cool down, it's very important. We're not going to do a long cool down sequence, but the exercises, they're pretty much what they're doing is resetting your neuromuscular system so that you can go back into your daily life without having your muscles cramp and tighten up. We're really going to stress a lot of the muscles around our hips, okay? That's where we did a lot of work. Also, our lats, our shoulders, our chest, pretty much the whole body, but we're going to do the most effective stretches that we can do in the shortest amount of time. This routine should take no more than five minutes,

[45:18] five, six minutes, okay? So let's go and start down here on our left knee, right knee up, okay? What we're going to do is we're going to stretch the hip flexor. So I'm going to contract my abdominal muscles, trying to tuck my glutes right up here up underneath me, trying to tilt my pelvis under. Then when I reach my left arm straight up in the air, fingertips pointing out towards the left, I should feel the stretch coming right in here. Now we just want to lift our chin up while maintaining this contraction, all right? Looking straight ahead, contracting in the abdominals, glutes, stretches right up here in the front. If the arm goes forward, because you have tight lats, try to force it up there in the air, okay? We have about 10 more seconds. So let's hang in there. Good. We really feel the hip flexor stretching here. Exactly. Okay, great. Now we're going to come up. We're going to turn and face the other way, lower it down to the right knee. Take your time here now, okay? Let's go ahead and set everything in position. So we're going to contract the abdominals and the glutes and press straight up.

[46:20] And we're holding here for 30 seconds. Now 30 seconds is pretty much the minimum here. We just want to do at least 30 seconds to make sure we stretch out the body. But if you find you're enjoying this, don't be afraid to go back through this routine. Do it one more time, two more times. As much as you want. These are great stretches. You really can't get enough of these. There is a lot of benefit to gain from stretching. Okay. Now let's come up here. Now you can do a butterfly stretch, which Patrick is going to demonstrate, or you can just lower right down here and do the side straddle. Everybody's flexibility is different, but if possible, we just want to try to split our legs out here, keep the posture upright, then we want to go forward. You see the variation that Patrick's doing, it's working the same muscles. We're trying to stretch out the adductor muscles right here in our inner thigh, okay? What I'm trying to do is I'm basically just pushing out. So is George, and we're trying to go forward. If we can, we want to lie down flat here.

[47:20] Okay. And holding the stretch for 30 seconds. I remember when I used to be a kid, I used to go all the way down. Now as I'm growing up, getting older, it's not, it's impossible to do the same thing because I didn't practice enough. Okay, good. Now let's close up here. Leg straddle ahead. Now what we want to do, I mean we just don't want to touch our toes. We want to pour our toes back towards us, contract our quadriceps, sit nice and upright, fingertips pointed down, we're pushing forward with the heel of our palm. If you find that to be too difficult by going forward like this, and you just, it's way too much, you can just do this. Brace your hands right here by your hips, push up, try to keep your posture upright. Still pulling your toes back, still contracting your quadriceps, and just trying to eventually lean forward. Once you can break 90 degrees going forward, you can probably take your hands off and push forward. We're doing good for the posterior chain.

[48:23] I'm straying, towel, over back. This is what you need to do. Now let's turn to our right. I'm going to kick my left leg around here, bring my right leg in. Now if you notice, I stick my knee straight out from my hip, and I form a 90 degree angle here, a 90 degree angle here. Now what I want to do is, I want to try to go forward, putting my head all the way down to the ground. Everybody has a different flexibility level though, so the key thing is, is to try to lean towards your left on the stretch. If you're left, legs back, lean towards your left, even if you have to stay upright. If you can lower down all the way, that's great. If you're right here, that's fine. This is for the extensors, this is for the muscles on the outside of the hip. You're going to have a lot of jumping, kicking, all those motions. We've really worked those muscles, pretty much anything functional, using the extensors and the flexors. And now let's rotate around. This is kind of cool. We're going to lean to our right, and swing to our left,

[49:23] and we come right back this way. Take your time getting into position though. So again, you want your left knee in front of your left hip, you want to try to create a 90 degree angle here, a 90 degree angle here. And same thing, try to lie forward. And if you have to, there's, you don't have to push forward. I mean, we don't want to feel any type of tearing, or a really strong pulling, just a slight pull in the muscles. And the muscles that we're trying to feel are the muscles right outside here, okay? Some people might feel a little bit up in the back. You should be feeling it all over. Some people might feel a little bit of hamstring. For the most part, you want to feel it on the outer part of your left hip here. Trying to lie down. Always a side that you're more flexible than the other, that is completely normal. Okay, now we're just going to kick back and through underneath. So we're in the quadruped position. So if you notice, we start out here with our knees, right underneath our hips, right? And what we're going to do, and our hands are underneath our shoulders, we're just in a strong foundation. We're going to extend our right hand forward,

[50:23] then our left hand forward. Now what I want you to do is drop your butt back while keeping your fingertips out there, trying to touch your butt to your heels, and trying to get your armpits down to the ground. Once you do that, you're trying to inch your fingertips away as much as you can. And when we're doing this, we want to feel the stretch coming right down throughout the lats, okay? Some people find that they spread their knees out here. They also get a adductor stretch here as well. That's good. You just get more flexibility in there. I happen to have a looser duct here, so I don't feel anything in the adductor, but I have tight lats. So this really stretches my lats every time. You're really lucky. Me, I'm tight pretty much everywhere. Okay, guys, great. Now we're going to come up here into this kneeling position. And what we want to do is we want to put our knees together, our heels together. We want to sit back here under our butt. We're going to interlace our fingers behind our back here. The most important thing is that I start to straighten my arms. That's more important than how high they get. Is that first they get straight,

[51:24] then I retract my shoulder blades, meaning I try to pull my shoulder blades together. Once I do that, I raise up as high as I can, and I want to feel stretched throughout my biceps, my deltoids, my pectoral muscles, all of that. And there's almost an infinite amount of stretches, but we don't want to spend all day stretching. You guys just did a hard workout, so we just want to hit some of the ones that really get the body back to where it was before you did your workout. Good, Patrick. You know, George is very tired here, so this is a great stretch for him. Absolutely. Everybody else has good flexibility. I should do this stretch more often. I'll be scared that if you do something that you're not good at, that's when you need to work on it. You can see this stretch, I'm pretty bad at it. That is something that I should put more time into. Okay, buddy. That's time, and that concludes our cool-down. So you have to remember that the cool-down, although it seems like it's easy, and it's almost like it's the part of the workout that everyone wants to forget to do. We did all the hard stuff, and we warm up because we want to get ready for the hard workout. Then we do the cool-down.

[52:25] But sometimes we forget to do. Remember, don't forget the cool-down. It's actually going to allow you to, it's going to help you to recover and to come back so you can be consistent, work out on a regular basis. It's very important that you do all parts of the workout, and you try to be as consistent as possible because that's what leads to progress. If you just, you know, come in on occasion and you do like maybe a round or two, and then you skip a few days, you're not going to see the results that you're looking for. The results are going to come through consistency. That's the most important thing. And the consistency is given to you by allowing your body to recover properly, which is why we do the cool-down. And also the cool-down is not only physical. For me, I use the cool-down as a way to change my mind I start from being the athlete, George St. Pierre, the fighter. When I work out, I'm the fighter. I'm a martial artist. But the cool-down allowed me to make the transition by being the fighter to the everyday normal guy. So it's more than an actual workout. It's also the changing of your mind,

[53:27] putting your mind back into what it should be in everyday's life. Great job, everybody. We are here to explain to you the Rush Fit Foundation movement. Hi, everyone. I'm George St. Pierre with Eric Owings. And we are here today to explain to you the Rush Fit Foundation movement.

[54:29] The foundation movements are, well, they're our foundation. So we don't want to just rush through this segment and think that these movements aren't necessary and you just want to hop into the workouts. It's actually very important that you spend time focusing on these basic foundation movements and then go into the workouts. If you've mastered the movements in this segment, you're gonna find that you're gonna be able to perform everything with ease, well not with ease, but with competency. And by doing that, you're gonna be able to progress and reach your fitness goals, whatever they may be. So it's very important you take time, you watch, you learn, and then you spend time mastering them. You don't need to use a lot of weight. Some of the movements are just body weight, some require dumbbells, but it's gonna be very important that you take your time and that you make sure that your body's in proper alignment. Pay attention throughout the concept of core activation, the concept of good posture, of doing everything with correct form, minimal amount of weight, and then add weight as you feel necessary. If you do these movements correctly, you're gonna find understanding the future DVDs

[55:31] or you're gonna be a piece of cake. We all train for different purposes, but make sure we get those movement right. Okay everybody, let's talk a little bit about the squat. The squat's one of the most fundamental motions that you're ever going to do in exercise and fighting in anything. I think almost everything that you do almost always has a component of changing your level up and down. So, whether a person says level change, whether it's a shoot, sprawl, whatever it is you're doing, almost always there's a little bit of a bend here. So, we want to develop this to the fullest capability. That's why we include squatting. You see a lot of squatting in this program. And in the beginning, you might notice that your range of motion is not so good, but eventually it will increase as long as you take your time and kind of work within your own limits, and eventually you want to get to what is considered full range of motion, which is a parallel thigh to the ground and an upright posture. So, if you notice when George comes down, George if you can, squat down and hold the squat here.

[56:32] If you notice, George is pretty much settling into his heels. His knees aren't far past his toes, and he's sitting back like he's sitting down into a chair. Then he comes back up in the standing. Yes, I'm going to do a few reps, George. Let everybody see you're doing the reps. And hold again at the bottom, George, if you can. Come back down. Good, yeah, right there. And like I said, if you notice parallel thigh, and then he starts to come up. Now, if necessary, the modification, if you're having a tough time, or you can stop, George, is going to be just to go a little bit more shallow. But what we don't want to see is, we don't want to see the knees buckling in. This is a definite no-no. We want the knees coming out, okay? If necessary, you can widen your stance a little bit. So you don't want a narrow stance, remember, shoulder width. Toes are slightly to the outside, just a little bit, okay? We're not going really wide, just a little bit to the outside. And what you want to do is your arms come up as you sit back. So you have to kind of sit back. Imagine you're sitting into a chair. And if you're having a tough time, you can always put a chair behind you. But if you find that even you lose control, like you get here and you almost fall over, you fall back,

[57:34] that's totally okay. What you want to do there is you want us to go a little bit more shallow than stand. And eventually, work your depth down till you get to parallel. So we're gonna do a couple more, George. Everybody see the full range of motion? Yep, then up, one more. And this is a motion that, okay, George, you can relax. For George, this is extremely important for any fighter, for any athlete, for anybody almost, is the ability to go up and down with control of the core, with complete stabilization here in the body, being able to maintain this here, all the way down to there. This is an essential motion for life, no matter whether you're fighting or just going about your daily routine. Absolutely, it's a movement pattern that happens every minute of every fight. And that's the squat. The lunge is one of the most essential motions, probably next to the squat.

[58:35] It's a little bit more complex, so there's a few more things we have to pay attention to. The squat, for most people, is a basic movement. Whereas lunging, we're actually going forward to the side, backwards or crossing behind. There's basically four ways that we're gonna do this. So, George, if you can go in all four directions, let's go two to the front, then two side to side. The knee doesn't touch the ground when you go in the front. And backwards. You see, my knee doesn't touch the ground. And the cross back variation. Here we go side to side. So, we try four different variations. Even though George has a good range of motion here, he's doing everything the proper way. And George, if I can, if I can just have you stop for a second and go out there into the lunge and lower down. And you can lower down. George is gonna let his knee touch here just to relax his leg muscles, but normally he's not gonna let his leg touch. If anything, you're just gonna kiss the ground. It's just gonna touch and come back up.

[59:36] Now, if you notice here, George, although he comes out, he comes forward, he's not driving his knee forward. He actually steps, he takes a natural step forward and then he just sinks his weight down into his heel. That's very important. What we don't want happening is this, and then I keep going forward. I feel a stretch here, like this is like a tearing sensation. Also, this puts a lot of stress on the knee. So, I wanna keep my foot on the ground. And then, as I take this natural step forward, I go here, then I just lower down, okay? We wanna maintain good posture. Sometimes we include a touchdown. That's totally acceptable. And the same thing, now if we come up, George, if we go to the side, notice how the knee doesn't go forward, you actually sit back. You sit back under your heels and the arms act as a counterbalance here, or you can touch down. If we move backwards, that's good. And if we go backwards here, same thing. We go back and then I sink down into the heel of the front leg. And if I go to the transverse of the crossback lunge, I come here, my front leg, I sink down into the heel and up.

[1:00:39] Now, each one of these lunges, we go in different directions because, well, our body can move in different directions. We don't want to develop strength in just one range of motion. We want a variety of movement patterns that give us more balance throughout our body. And would you say this is pretty similar to what you do when you take someone down, when you shoot him for a take-down? Absolutely, not only I would say the take-down, the changing level, the footwork, even the most basic stuff that we do in mixed martial art. We use lunges in a certain way. And you'll find at home, say, if you have a hard time going all the way out into this position, you feel that you lose your balance and have enough tough time, the best thing to do here is go a little bit wider with your stance, take a natural step forward, and then you're just gonna do what we call a split squat. So it's a variation. We're not lunging, we actually stay in stance. So you can stay in stance and just touch down or just stay up here and you come up. And if you find you have to restrict your range of motion a bit, that's totally acceptable. But what you don't want to do is come out here where you feel like you're falling and your knees are shaking and you're losing balance. So same thing with the lateral lunge.

[1:01:40] So I have to just stay here. I can do a stationary movement and restrict the range of motion a bit. But you want to try to get to where you do the full range of motion and include the movement patterns. But if you have to, you can stay stationary, do, say, five reps, 10 reps, how many areas is necessary from a stationary position. Then you switch, come into a stationary position, and it'll look just like this. That's the modification if you're having a tough time. And that's the lunge. The push-up is one of the most basic upper body exercises we can do. It requires no equipment. And you can almost do it in any space. You just have a tiny little space in your living room, your bedroom, wherever. You can always do some push-ups. Now, the key to a push-up is maintaining good alignment of the body. So I should almost be able to transfer the same exact stance that you see here, standing right to the ground. We don't want to be caved in here but too high. We want to think about almost a lot of the body. So we want to think about the same exact stance almost a line that forms if you do it straight through the body,

[1:02:42] your ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Going through the, once the deviations start to occur, that shows that your core stability is now, it's malfunctioning, and you're going to have to make a modification. We'll show some modifications, but let's first take a look at how it's performed correctly. George, let's go ahead and do a couple push-ups here, okay? Just a normal standard push-up. Notice how George has a great alignment here with his body, it's straight through. And that's because George has a strong core. By having a strong core, he's able to maintain that position. Now, George can do a variety of push-ups here. Let's do some knuckle push-ups, George. So by changing his grip, he changes the angle. And the angle changes which muscles are working. And he can work different parts of his body just by changing the way that his hands are placed. He can go narrower or wide with his grips. He can go up on his knuckles, that requires more wrist stability. Push-ups have a lot of variations. They have a lot of stuff you can do. Let's show a plyo push-up here. Just show, this is an explosive push-up. So it's the same movement, but just perform differently. Okay, great, and go and relax. So that's basically a perfect push-up.

[1:03:46] Now, if you're having a tough time and you find, like I said, I come into this position and I get up here and I start doing this or my head starts coming down. I start breaking my form. The best modification you can make when that starts happening, so maybe, let's say I start off strong. I do five push-ups. But then my range of motion starts to get shorter. My neck starts to lead down. My hips start to sag. I wanna try to maintain this alignment. Then it's lowered down to my knees. From here, I continue on how I was doing just off my knees. That makes the resistance much less and I'm able to do it. If I find that even this, I start to sag and I start to break down. Then what I wanna do is I just wanna lower back, take a break, come back into alignment. So notice that means my shoulders are over my hands, my head's in place, and it's my arms that are bending. I'm stabilizing my body with my core. Eric, is that fair to say that the push-up also, it works, basically it works the core and all the body at the same time.

[1:04:47] It's not only the arm. Yeah, well, George, it's funny that you asked that because the thing about the push-up is that it's predominantly a core exercise. And remember guys, core's beyond just abdominals. It's pretty much everything that's stabilizing with the body, so just maintaining the push-up positions actually quite difficult. If someone just tries to maintain this in good alignment for one minute, they'll start to fatigue. And what we're doing is we're adding on the arm exercise to it, so just don't think of a push-up as only a pushing exercise. Think about it as a total body exercise. And that's kinda like the whole thing that we're getting at in functional training, because for fighting, you have to be able to use your whole body at one time and in life, pretty much, you have to. Yeah, that's a variation where George's is a scapular retraction and now he's working the backside of his body. All right, great job. And that's the push-up. The sit-up is a very basic motion that I think everybody's probably done

[1:05:47] once or twice in their life. Whether we even realize, sometimes we just sit up out of our bed, so spinal flexion's really what we can call this, okay? And what we're doing when we do a sit-up is we're trying to use the abdominals, and we actually use our neck flexors here too. So pretty much, think of the spine is not just here in this little area, right? It's the whole entire spinal column. And it's the idea of bringing everything forward. So that idea of flexion is a very essential movement pattern. One of the easiest ways to train this is by doing a sit-up. And you'll see this in the warm-up. So George's gonna come up, where George starts to raise up in the air. Good. Now as you lie down, let's bend the knees and do a traditional sit-up. Now we take your elbows down towards your hips and you sit all the way up. Just widen your feet out a little bit if you can, George. Good. And these are all good variations. Now, you'll find that throughout a fight you probably sit up quite a bit, right? I mean, where you have to get up off the ground if you get taken down. Absolutely, on the ground. And also standing up, I think, just a basic punch.

[1:06:47] Sometimes you need to crunch down. Yeah, kinda cover. That's when the abdominal comes into play. And remember, anything like this, this is spinal flexion, this is gonna require the abdominal muscles to contract. Now we can overload this pattern by putting a weight in your hands. Just using your body weight sometimes is enough. So there's a lot of variety in how to do this. And you'll find that sometimes for some people a full sit-up can be sort of like jarring on the spine. Sometimes you have difficulty with that. If that happens to be the case, there's nothing wrong with just doing an abdominal crunch variation. The key thing is we don't wanna yank the head forward. We just wanna kinda put our fingers here or we can even cross over here. And when we do this, we just bring the shoulder blades off the ground and lower it out. So this is a modification for people who might find the full sit-up to be difficult. You can always do a partial motion. Then eventually, as you get stronger, work yourself into a full range of motion. And that's the sit-up.

[1:07:49] Now we're gonna talk about back extension. Back extension is something that, it's very important actually in everything in life. All these exercises that we're doing are extremely important, but this is one of those things that if we don't have our extensor, basically the erector muscles of the spine, we're gonna collapse. We're gonna develop a posture like this. And posture like this is not really good for anything in life, but especially not for fighting, right? I mean, fighting is one of the things you have to have good posture. Exactly, plus it's gonna make you have injuries. It's not gonna keep your body healthy. It's very important to have a good posture, keep your body healthy and stay injury-free. Now, George is just gonna show a variation of the back extension. And so you can lower down here, George. You can do the more difficult one, and that's this. That's the opposite. But you can also just do it off the knees too. So if George goes down, if he knows when he gets up here, so yeah, he's gotta activate all this. Now this has a little bit more to do than just back extension. That has glute activation. Now here, he's pretty much extending throughout the spine. He's working all these muscles. Now the glutes work here too. And this is one of the kneeling opposites

[1:08:49] of the stuproin position opposites is an advanced form of back extension with also glute activation and various other things. Now, when he goes down, this is pretty much showing, I think, back extension in a more pure form. Although we are also encompassing pretty much everything here on the posterior chain. What, and just, George, if you can, tilt your chin in. What's happening here is pretty much contracting from head to toe all the way down to spine, all the way throughout. And as, yeah, you can go and relax down, George. So this is one of those movements that, although it appears simple, it's actually quite difficult. I mean, you'll find that if you put this into the circuits and you're just doing this exercise on a daily basis, whenever you do that isometric contraction, what happens is you just, basically, the lactic acid starts building up throughout the body. But as you do it more and more, you start to develop a tolerance to it and you get stronger and you actually develop better posture where you can stay upright or perform a take down more efficiently or a guard pass more efficiently. Now we're gonna show a modification here. If you're having a tough time doing the full extension with all four limbs off the ground, what George is gonna do is gonna put his head down

[1:09:51] on the ground and he's gonna go one, then over to his other hand, two, to his leg now, three, and then to his other one, four. You can try to hold each one for about five seconds and eventually you can try to do the lying opposites. So George, let's go opposite leg, opposite arm. And you can go side to side like that. Now if you've done the opposites and you've been able to complete, you know, going side to side, now let's try doing everything together. You do all four limbs off the ground, so you try to raise the legs off. And what George is trying to do is get everything just pretty much keeping just as abdominals and as thighs on the ground and take everything else off the ground, which causes everything on his back to have to contract. And that's gonna give him good back extension and good posture, and that's the back extension. Now let's talk about rotation. You'll find in this program, there's a lot of movements that requires to rotate, moving our shoulders around our spine. This is a consistent thing you'll find

[1:10:52] pretty much throughout fighting too, right? I mean, to throw a punch, to throw a kick, to almost do any type of judo style take down. There's almost always a rotational component. Absolutely, it's a natural movement pattern of the body. It's, you can see this in every movement, every technique and mixed martial art. And you'll find that as we're doing these rotation movements, sometimes we take a pose where we're just moving our shoulders around our spine, pretty much stays looking straight ahead. Sometimes we'll follow. So you'll notice if George is now is following. Now George, let's shorten up your range of motion, let's stay looking straight ahead with no movement from the head, but so ever just your shoulders moving around. And these are both acceptable forms of rotation. Now you'll also notice if George is what we call a prone rotation, okay? From down in the push up position, just opening and closing. George, you don't have to even pause that long, just pause for about a second. So George is gonna rotate there again. He's rotating around and down, go to the other side, go inside the side. And there's also another form of rotation here that you'll see, actually there's various forms. You'll notice it's a consistent theme. And you just wanna be aware that's not to overdo it.

[1:11:52] Don't try to over rotate, let your natural range of motion sort of dictate that. Always start with going with a restricted range of motion and gradually building up to where you feel like you're reaching those outer limits, then that's where you wanna stop. You don't wanna go too far. And George, let's just show the Kimoura sit up. This is another sit up that you'll see throughout. And notice how he's rotating as he comes up. So here again, we're almost combining the movement pattern, spinal flexion with rotation. And that's one of the things you're gonna notice throughout the program is that there's a lot of rotation going on. One of the key things though, is to make sure that you have your core activated, meaning that your muscles aren't loose and your spine's not really loose. You wanna make sure everything's strong and stabilized. That way as you're rotating, you're not gonna hurt yourself. That's very important. That's also something we're gonna talk about is the concept of core activation. But for right now, that covers rotation. Now let's talk a little bit about core activation. Core activation is one of those things that,

[1:12:54] it's actually very complex if you wanna talk about it because you can, pretty much, we can get into the beta on what part of the core are we talking about? Are we talking about the core of the knee and the intrinsic stabilizers inside the knee or whatever little joint? But a consistent thing we're talking about is basically the stabilization of our midsection of the spine. You're gonna hear core activation throughout and you're gonna, pretty much, every exercise that we do, it has to be done first. We have to activate the core before we squat. We don't wanna have a loose core because then everything tumbles in. So we always have to keep the body active. One of the best examples, the simplest way I can explain this and for George and for everybody at home, if I were to be in front of George, I'm gonna punch him as hard as I can in the stomach. So say if you're in a square stance, George, and you were to activate your core, you were to brace for this punch that's gonna cause you to do it. Exactly, now you saw what happened there. We're gonna go ahead and do it again. He braces, now everything here tightens up. That's the transverse abdominis muscle. It's kind of like this little girdle that's tightening everything up. It's activating your diaphragm, your rectus abdominis, all of these muscles around here.

[1:13:54] Everything's doing its job to keep the spine in place. So, well, in this case, so you can brace for a punch, but also if you were to lift a heavy weight, you'll find almost any movement that you do, that's gonna become what you do before you do your movement. Whether you're gonna take off running, whether you're gonna throw a punch, whether you're gonna throw a kick, whether you're gonna do a power clean or a squat or anything, you're always gonna have to have core activation. Let's just show one more example here with George. Let's go and go down into the plank position. And this is one of those ones that you can kind of almost test if your core is activating just by holding this. Now, George's core is activating. We know this because of the alignment. We have ear, shoulder, hip. Everything here is nice and tight, and George's, he's contracted throughout. One thing you'll notice here is that his body's not moving at all. So George is breathing, he's definitely, oxygen's going in off his body. He's not losing the core activation. This is very essential. You don't wanna start breathing, let your body collapse as you're breathing. You wanna keep everything in place. And if you can, you try to breathe into the back of the lungs as you're there.

[1:14:55] Try not to just breathe real shallow. Try to breathe natural, but it's gonna be a little bit more difficult because this is all contracting. This is restricting the movement of your ribs a little bit, but you're still able to breathe into the back. That's the whole idea. So breathe naturally, yet keep the muscles activated. It's a very important concept that not only for our program, but just for life in general. If you're ever gonna pick anything up, if you're ever gonna do any activity, this can help you. And that covers the basics of core activation. Okay, now let's talk about the burpee. The burpee is, in my opinion, it's one of those motions that probably best simulates the energetics of a fight. If you do it with an explosive nature and you really go after it, you can get a very intense workout in less than a minute if you just do as many as you can. It's one of those things that, because there's so much muscle being used and there's so much movement involved that this really accelerates the metabolism and it works pretty much every muscle throughout the body. Let's go ahead and have you show a few burpees, George,

[1:15:57] just in full speed. Let's do three of them. So if you notice, we have almost all those components that we talked about, we have, okay, you can go and relax. We have squatting, we have sort of almost like a lunge, we have a plank position, we have core activation, we have jumping, we have a pushup, we have flexion of the spine, we have so much movement going on here. And for some people, this, we're actually for almost everybody, this is a difficult exercise. Absolutely, it's raised at a hard rate. Yeah, and it's also pretty similar to a sprawl motion too, right? Like, as someone were to try to take you down, it's almost like you're sprawling. You can say it's like a sprawl and also could be following by a takedown. The same push that you find during a takedown, it's the same push that you use when you come up. Yeah, so there's a lot of functional transfer, if you wanna use that word, it's actually a great way to describe it. There's functional transfer from this movement into what George does or what most athletes do. Now, for some people,

[1:16:57] the most difficult part might be the squat thrust. So let's just show the squat thrust component, George, where you just jump back and jump up, okay? Now, if you have a hard time doing that, because George is a strong person and he has good coordination, for some people that might be a little bit too much in the beginning and the jump at the top. So what I'm gonna suggest as a modification, if you're having a tough time doing the squat thrust, because you see squat thrust and burpees throughout the program, is I suggest you do this and sprawling. So this is a great substitution for squat thrust, burpees, and sprawling motions throughout. What I like to see you do is this, you just basically come down, try to get your hands onto the ground, you're gonna step back with one foot, back with the other, back with the foot, back here, and then stand. That's a fine substitution. You'll find when you get used to it, you can build up speed, and then eventually you can get into the full motion where you hop back and you hop up. And that covers the burpee and the squat thrust.

[1:17:58] Okay, now we're gonna talk a little bit about addressing the dumbbells. And what I mean by that is how we pick the dumbbell up off the ground. My recommendation for almost anybody, yeah, I even do this myself when I train, is to set my dumbbells on something about any routine knee to waist height. I prefer a chair or a table, or if I'm at a gym, I prefer like the rack itself. And the reason being is we don't wanna come up to our dumbbells and try to pick them up like this. Now throughout the program, you might notice, cause we're doing real workouts, you might notice that that happens, you might notice people set their dumbbells down, they are bent in the spine. So you're gonna be like, that's a contradiction. But what happens when you have a strong core, you can get away with it. If I do this to you right now, like I'm technically in bad posture, and look, I just did it the wrong way. But that's cause I have a strong core, I'm able to do that. But if I'm deconditioned, then I do this type of motion, I could hurt myself. And that's very important to realize that just cause you can get away with it, you should try not to. You should always make it your objective to do everything the correct way. So as you get stronger and stronger,

[1:19:00] you can make a mistake, but to do it the correct way, this is what George is gonna show now. This is how we want you to come down if you're gonna pick your dumbbells off off the ground. Notice how his back's in a strong, flat, neutral position. And that means his core's activated. Now if you go up and you set your dumbbells back down, George, same thing, notice he whitens out his stance a little bit, then he drops them down, strong position. And that's how you address the dumbbell. Okay, the dumbbell squat is very similar to the squat that we learned for just basic body weight squatting. It's the same mechanics, the only difference is that now we have resistance at it. So George is gonna come up, address the dumbbells, he's gonna step back, and he's gonna set his stance at it, shoulder width apart, the toes can point slightly outward, but for the most part, his legs are straight ahead. And with his dumbbells by his side, he's just gonna squat down and then come back up. And notice how the dumbbells move a little bit out the way. Good posture, try to get his thighs down to parallel each time. Good, now George, if you can, let's clean him up.

[1:20:00] And now this is what we call a front squat. So it's pretty much the same thing, notice how he lowers down and drives up. The weights stay high, pushing the elbows forward, and notice how he gets down deep, it's the same thing. So there's two basic variations that we're looking at doing, and that's our basic squat with our dumbbells to the side, and then with our dumbbells up, the front squat variation. These both, basically what we're doing is the same type of squatting motion, like I said, the same mechanics. We're sitting back into that chair, the knees aren't going too far forward, we're activating all the leg muscles, the core muscles, everything throughout, and this makes your legs very strong. Keep everything straight. And that's the dumbbell squat. Okay, the dumbbell lunge is essentially the same lunge that we learned before, except now we're just adding resistance. The most common way that we're not at resistance is just by holding the weights down by our side, starting off George feet together, and let's go and do lunges, do all four directions, okay? Let's go forward, okay?

[1:21:01] Then we'll go with our lateral lunge to the side. Excellent, let's go backwards now, and we'll do our cross-back lunge. Okay, so those are four directions, and you'll notice that each one's a little bit different, but yet it's pretty much the same. Let's go back out to the forward lunge again one more time though. So notice when George comes down here, when he lunges, now George lowers his knee down because that's for what I'm showing you guys, if he holds that there, it actually becomes excruciatingly painful. And so he's taking a little breakdown here, but normally his knee would not be on the ground. He's just gonna be here for a momentary pause and he comes back. The key thing here though is actually how he's putting the weight onto his foot. His weight's not going onto the ball, his foot and his toes, and his knee's not projecting forward, he just steps forward and he lowers down into the heel. 90 degrees. Yeah, exactly. Get that thigh to parallel, then come right back up into standing, pushing off the ball of the foot, and there is, he's back into his position. So forward and backwards, and you can go multi-directions. Now do you like doing multi-direction lunges, George?

[1:22:03] I like it because when I'm fighting in every day of life, you know, you're going multi-direction. So it's important that your training reflect what you will perform. And that's the dumbbell lunge. The dumbbell standing press is one of the best strength-building exercises that we have for the upper body. What happens here is we want to maintain, first of all, let's go bring the dumbbells up, George, to the rack position. This is what we call the rack position, okay? Meaning that we have them racked up top here. Now, very important here is that we don't want George extending out the spine, we actually want core activation, or that key theme, we want to keep everything here in place. And then George, let's just press them straight up with your palms facing. That's a basic standing press. Now let's do another repetition with a rotation. That's also an acceptable form of pressing. Yeah, rotating at the bottom. And now let's do a push press, which is an explosive form. Good, and let's do that one more time, George. Show standing press, now a basic standing press.

[1:23:03] Just straight up, good. Then rotating, and then the push press, where if you notice, he looks down as he presses up. The reason why he does it, you can even do that in your regular presses too, if you just want to develop this habit. What George is doing when he does this, he's clearing out more space back here between his scapula, so he can actually get better extension on his arms when he does that. So when I look down, I say, but I don't want to stay looking down, as I lower it down, I'll look up. Other thing is, you notice George, he's not doing this. He's not sticking his chest out to try to get his chest involved in all these other muscles, to use more weight. He's maintaining good core alignment, which actually makes him a better athlete. It keeps him safe, and it gives him real functional strength. It's not an artificial form of strength that we're doing here. He's actually keeping his body in the alignment that it should be in. And then he's using the weight that actually suits his body. So remember, don't try to use a bunch of weight here. Don't let your ego get involved in the lift. Try to use just what you can use with good form. Quality over quantity. Yes, that's one of the most important concepts

[1:24:04] you're gonna, quality over quantity. And if you get used to doing that, you'll find that eventually the weight will increase. And so with this one, just be, let it go, gradually a lot of times we get our egos attached to the pressing motions, like how much do you bench press? And would you say that that's really even relevant in a fight, how much you bench press? Doesn't make any difference. Okay, so one more thing here, just on the press before we wrap it up here, is that when you do the push press, remember that's an advanced variation. When we do this, this requires a little bit more explosion. We're using the legs, we're popping the hips. If any motion, if you find that it's a little bit too ballistic, that you maybe don't feel comfortable doing it, it's totally fine to substitute just a standard press. And that's where we just come up and down, or even looking straight ahead, very basic. So you don't have to do the push press unless you feel you're ready for that. And that's the basics of the dumbbell standing press. Okay, now let's talk about the dumbbell row. I consider the dumbbell row to be sort of like

[1:25:06] the yin to the yang or the yang to the yin to the standing press. It's sort of like the balancing out motion. And it's a very important motion because we don't really get any type of pulling motion with our body weight exercises. So we wanna make sure that we include a pulling motion with the dumbbells. The important thing here is you can notice when George comes down, let's go ahead and do a couple of stationary rows there, George. Good, one, let's do three here. Two, one more, and three. And you can come back in the standing. Now if you notice when George, when he does his row, he sits back with his hips this way, onto his heels with his chest over spine. He does not round, he keeps the back in a nice strong neutral position there. You remember the concept, core activation. It stays throughout, okay? So the core has to activate. I sit back here and then I'm in good position. Now this is a very important motion. So we have to remember we try to pull our elbows back and we're pulling with our elbows. That activates our lats, our rhomboids, our traps. All of these muscles that make our backs very strong and allow us to do this motion, we have to use those. The biceps, the forearms, everything here, it is activating as well.

[1:26:08] But remember we wanna pull with the elbow. Now George, let's show a rotational row. This is where he's actually going side to side and let's go and get some spinal rotation going on there. Good. Now if you notice it's the same motion. Now he's just alternating arms, but still the same strong back position. The core is activated and he's moving the elbows around the spine. And George, now let's go and go down into the prone position. Oh no, okay, actually I'm gonna grab one of these and just do a one arm, one leg row. Yeah, let's check that out. Now he's doing the same type of row, but now he's on, it's much more, this is an advanced variation. Now if George wanted to modify this because say balance were an issue, let's say you're having a hard time, don't let George put your foot down. They're gonna try to stay bent over, good, and row. And you could even brace, now brace your hand and your knee there too, George. Yeah, that gives him more stability. Okay, so that's an easier modification when you see a one arm, one leg row. And let's do one prone row, George. So put the dumbbells down here in front of you and out into this position. And we're just gonna go side to side a few times. So now he's in that push up type position.

[1:27:09] And notice he's pulling, he sets the weight down. He's going side to side. My core is working as well. Yeah, this is actuating his core to the extreme. Now what we want here, George, let's lower down to the knees. Let's say George fatigues and he wants to continue on rowing, but his core got, it's gotten tired. This is a great modification to make if you find that that type of prone row becomes too difficult. You can always lower down to your knees that makes it a little bit easier on the core and you can still get that rowing motion in, which is a very important motion. And that's the basics of the dumbbell row. Now let's talk about the exercise upright rowing or high pulling and or I should say, because they're not exactly the same, but it's a similar movement pattern. Let's first look at the upright row. You'll notice this is a movement throughout. Now the upright row is basically George in just a natural stack position, stacked meaning ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Nice natural posture. He's using the trapezius muscles,

[1:28:10] the deltoids, the biceps. Everything here and he's pulling upward. Notice how the elbow comes up higher than the wrist and he's just activating all that pulling up. Now that's our basic movement pattern. Now George is gonna do a little bit more advanced. George, you can actually just use one. You don't have to even use two here. Now let's do a high pull. Now the difference with the high pull is this is leading into the Olympic lifts. He's using his legs. He's popping his hip, driving with his legs and then using that to help pop it up. And it's more of a leg exercise when the arms are just activating towards the top. They're both great variations. And if you notice that the high pull is a little bit complicated, you can always substitute back with our basic that you saw there, which is just the upright row. Whether it's with one dumbbell or with two dumbbells. And then if you feel comfortable, we use our legs. And you'll notice, hey George, can we do this a couple more times? I just wanna show one more thing here when you do it. And if you notice when George does this motion, look at his spine. His spine is nice and strong. His core is activated throughout and that allows him to connect his legs to his arms.

[1:29:10] The actual work is more with the leg than the shoulder actually. Yes. That's kinda like with a punch or a kick too, right? I mean, like almost everything that you do, it's more from the hips and the formation. Our legs is the strongest part of our body. The legs are much more stronger than the arms. So that's why we use a leg for everything that we do. And that covers the basics of the dumbbell high pull or the upright row. Now we're gonna talk about the dumbbell clean, or the dumbbell power clean. Olympic lifting in my opinion is what we're all kind of building up to with, you know, with athletic training and weightlifting. I think that's the main value of weight training for a fighter. Would you agree? I agree. And that's one of the reasons why I implement Olympic lifting movement pattern in my training because the Olympic lifters are the most explosive athlete in the world. And in my sport, I need explosiveness. So George a lot of times trains with a barbell, but a dumbbell is a fine substitution. Never feel, you know, like just because you don't have

[1:30:11] a big, heavy weight, we can't get the same effect. Because when you think about what we're doing, whether it's using a barbell, a kettlebell, a dumbbell, whatever it is, we're essentially doing a jumping motion. This concept of triple extension, extension of the ankle, knee, and hip joint like this. That's what people are doing with it. So George, let's go and jump up. Yeah, let's show that a few more times. So we're gonna do a little bit of a jump. Let's show that a few more times. So that's what it looks like without and really jump off the ground and really exaggerate it. And so if you notice what an Olympic lift is, essentially we're projecting the weights upward, right? With this shrug, with this type of movement pattern, kind of like we're jumping up off the ground because we have heavy weights, we don't really jump. A lot of times we stay planted on the ground. Then as I land, I pop my elbows forward and that gets me underneath the weight. So I'm actually putting myself underneath the weight, then I stand. We transfer basically, we transfer all our energy in the tools that we have, either if it's a barbell or a dumbbell in Olympic lifting, they use a barbell.

[1:31:12] But we're gonna transfer all the energy of the movement in our dumbbell. Yes. So let's go and show it a few times with the dumbbell. Let's take a look at the basics here. So the first thing is this there again, we get ourselves in a nice strong position. We notice George will fold over, but keeping the back in a strong position, he'll extend up and he does the catch. So there's a couple parts of George. So this is going to stress just the, yeah, good. And if you notice, let's do it one more time. Excellent. And what he's doing there, are you gonna set the dumbbells down, George? He's extending here, okay? And remember as he's extending, it looks like he's just throwing the weights up. But really what's happening is the weights are projecting upward and as he dips, he punches his elbow forward and he maintains good position here and he squats down, he lands on his heels, then he stands, then he lowers. And if you notice, he's not in a rush. He's not doing this and dropping them down. It's very deliberate and slow because it's the explosiveness that he's trying to capture. He's not just trying to throw the weights around into a bunch of repetitions.

[1:32:13] He's focusing on good leg drive every time. And another key component to the power clean is coordination. It's very difficult to project a weight in one direction and then drop and switch directions, catch and stabilize. So this is sort of like the epitome of athleticism. Yeah, and when you drop down underneath, it's like a free fall. You have to let your leg just like a free fall. You let everything go. So this is one of those motions that you might find almost too complicated in the beginning. And remember the best way to practice is with no weight. Get used to this motion of sort of jumping, landing and punching your elbows forward. Then eventually try to shorten the jump where it's just this. But in the beginning if you find that's too difficult, let's take a look at a fine substitution here. So if it's not going to be the same muscle energetics, we're going to lose some explosiveness. We're not going to get the same coordination factor, but we're training similar muscles. So if I'm not able to do a power clean yet and I'm practicing just my body weight, I can do this when a power clean and a press or whatever

[1:33:14] pops up in a push press, pops up into the routine. I'm just going to lower down to a squat, stand, curl. So that's a fine substitution for the clean. Now if it calls for a clean and press, I'm going to do the same thing. I'm going to squat, curl and press. So throughout the movements, you might see that. Throughout the workout, you might see the need for a clean. There's a substitution, OK? We squat and we curl. And if it's a clean and push press or a dumbbell power clean with a push press, we're going to come here and press. Keeping everything very basic, but still working similar muscles. And that covers the basis of the dumbbell clean. OK, the dumbbell swing is kind of like a mix. It's a very functional exercise. It's not as explosive or requires much coordination as an Olympic lift, yet you're integrating the legs with an upper body movement. Similar to the high pool, similar to the power clean, you have to think a little bit more simplistic,

[1:34:15] but it's a great motion. It develops a lot of energy. It's a great motion. It develops overall athleticism, I think. George, you want to go and pick up a dumbbell? Absolutely. Show us how you do it. So you notice George grabs a 30 pound dumbbell, which seems kind of heavy, but it's actually not that bad because he's using his legs. Remember, George is very strong, so you might not be out of 30 yet. You might start with a 5 pound weight, a 10 pound weight, even just your body weight. Now, if you notice how George is doing this, he takes a little pause at the top, right? And as he lowers down, his core is activated the whole entire time, and he maintains alignment here. He's not collapsing. If you notice one of the key things here is where you look. So if I stay looking straight ahead, as I lower down, I swing up, my spine stays neutral. If I happen to try to follow the weight, I might overextend at the back and hurt my spine here, and I might injure myself if I try following it down. So don't really look at the weight with this one. Just stay looking straight ahead. Nice natural stance. And if you find that there again,

[1:35:15] you feel the weights getting out of control. You feel you might hurt your shoulder. You just don't feel comfortable going all the way up. You can always play with the range of motion with this, meaning I can dip a little bit more shallow, and I can swing not as high. So a substitution for this will be, as I'm here, just barely moving. And then as I feel more comfortable, I can start working my height up, driving my legs down more, to eventually getting into a full swing. The power comes from his legs. Yes. Not from the shoulder. Don't try to lift the weight with your shoulder. It's all the glute, the core, and the legs. And a key detail of that, if you just want to get that leg drive, is when you go down, try not to push off the balls of your feet. Try to push your heels down to the ground. That activates all of these muscles, and it gives you much more power. And that's where the power comes from. From the hamstrings, from the glutes, from the back. And that covers the basics of the dumbbell swing. OK, now we're going to talk a little bit about the dumbbell

[1:36:18] get up. We don't have to use a dumbbell, but it's probably the best variation, especially for using this at home. Some people, old strong, used to use barbells, used to use all kinds of big, heavy objects. Even you could probably even use a human body. Now, the thing about the get up, let's go and show it a few times, George. It's entirety. If you notice throughout, George is keeping his eyes on the weight the whole time. That's very important. Don't discount that in this thing. He's just doing it for whatever reason. This is one of the most important details you can learn about this whole entire movement. Do not, at any time, take your eyes off this weight. Don't look at the screen. Don't watch us doing it. When you start doing your get ups, the only thing is you and your weight. Because if you take your eyes off that weight, it's very likely it could definitely happen that this weight could come down and hit you. You don't want to get hit in the head by a dumbbell, especially if you're using 15, 20, 30 pounds or more. It can cause some damage. Absolutely. Now, what would you say is the main functional value for you using that movement, George? I would say during my fight, I use a technique called the hip

[1:37:22] eyes to stand back up when I'm under one of my opponents. So that's pretty much working the same muscles throughout? Absolutely. It's pretty much the same pattern. And remember to keep the eyes on the dumbbell. The eyes directed your movement. So when we're going up, keep looking up. Don't look down. Very important, don't look at us on the TV. You might hurt yourself. Now, let's go and try to break down what's happening with the get up. We're using no weight here because we're going to have George go very slow. And this is actually a great way to start learning how to use this. No weight in your hand and just looking at the hand that's up. Now, let's break down what's happening here throughout. OK, so George's shoulders are working, everything's working. Now, his abdominals are working, his obliques are working, the shoulder over here is working. As he comes up, now this is very important. Let's go and stop here now, George. As George comes up, notice how he goes in the opposite direction of the arm that's extended. He comes up and his left arm, so if he's holding the weight with his right hand, or if he's looking at his right hand,

[1:38:22] his left arm is the base support here as he comes up. So this takes some of the stress off the body and it gives it throughout the structure. Let's stay here for a second, George. Let's come back down. I want to stress leg position. So you notice that when George came up here, the arm that's the post arm, being his left arm, is the same leg that's been. This is the same position. We do this on purpose when we do our training, because this is what we call the staggered butterfly guard, or staggered hooks guard. He's doing this as a very functional transfer into the body. Now, at this point, George has noticed how this knee is up in the air, OK, his foot's down. When he decides to make his move and come up in the stand, he's going to hip-heist up, meaning he's going to turn his hips up. Yeah, and he gets his knee on the ground. And now as he comes up in the stand, he just drives upward. As he lowers back down, he sets his knee onto the ground and he reverses the whole motion. Notice how as he steps, yeah, let's come back here real quick, George, let's come up. Yeah, notice how when he comes down, he lets his foot flip around and his left arm post onto the ground. Then he lowers down elbow onto the elbow. Then he goes down to the shoulder. Then that's his leg straight and all the way back out.

[1:39:25] So as you can see, there's a lot of movement going on. And you can't discredit any one move. You have to make sure that each one is done correctly. So it's very important. This is the most difficult part for people, is this, as I'm here, is getting this knee back. And as a base of support, I want to get it underneath my hip. It's very important as I'm doing this that I don't keep my knee too narrow because then I'll collapse as I try to come up. So if you find that you can just get to here in this spot, all you feel comfortable with, that's a half get up. And that is a fine substitution. So if necessary, you can come up just to the halfway post. Let's do a half get up, George. You notice the description is a little bit longer because we want to be sure they're doing this correctly. This is a very important motion. So as he comes up, you start to drive up and sit all the way up into the post position. There we go. Now that's a half get up. Let's slide back down, George. So you go down elbow, shoulder, line straight, and then back up again, a half get up. Now if you notice now here, now if he's going to do

[1:40:25] the full get up, he's basically going to pull his left leg back underneath of him. There you go. So that gives him a base support. He's going to turn straight up the body, come fully in the standing, and then it really reverses the motion. That's a full get up. He's going to come back down to the knee, fold the left leg in, post the left arm, then lower down, elbow, shoulder, flat on the ground. And that covers the dumbbell get up.
