TITLE: Balance and Agility
SOURCE: Georges St-Pierre RUSHFIT — DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Rushfit Balance and Agility.mp4
RELEASE YEAR: 2010
DURATION: 38:26
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] Hi everyone, I'm Gérard Saint-Pierre, welcome to my Rush Fit Warmup. This program has been designed by Eric Owens. The Rush Fit Warmup is a multi-faceted warmup that uses only body weight motions and allows you to work every muscle of your body in a functional manner to get you ready for the work to come in the rounds. So let's not waste too much time guys, let's go and get started here with a shoulder width stance and we're just going to do some torso twist. So as you notice I want to get my elbows up about shoulder height, I can dip down a little bit that's okay and I pick a good pivot point on the ground. I want to rotate back and forth, imagine that my elbows if there's a line just about going about 180 degrees if there's a sphere here right, I don't want to go too far, I don't want to go all the way around here, I don't want to injure myself because remember we're just warming up, we're trying to get the body loose, core temperature up so we don't injure

[01:00] ourselves and we're ready for the work to come. The body is like an elastic, if you try to stress an elastic when it's cold it's going to snap, if you try to stretch it when it's warm now you're going to be able to feel with it. Now we're doing each exercise for 60 seconds, so right now we have about 10 seconds left and then we're going to switch and go into our next exercise which is a side bend. Let's keep going though guys, we have about 5 seconds, alright good job. So now here in our stance we're just going to lean to one side kicking our hip out reaching over then going to the other side. This is a side bend and what we don't want to do is we don't want to bend forward and then over we want to keep our body stacked meaning knee, hip, shoulder, everything in alignment, we let the hip kick out to the side and we reach. This is going to be stretching the muscles of the hips and of the lats and this is a very important movement pattern in most functional fitness and in fighting you have to be able to move side to side as well as forward and backwards.

[02:04] Like every other exercise you start slowly and you try to pick it up as time goes on. Now we have about 20 seconds left in this and also work at your own rate, if you find you're starting to fatigue, the form is starting to go away, step back maybe take a few deep breaths and get back at it. One more seconds guys. Warm up is very important, it prevents injuries and it allows us to have our full range of motion. Okay great job, now let's turn and face this direction and we're going to come down onto our fingers walking out into the plank position and we're going to walk our feet up to our hands. We need to turn, switch directions and go back in the other direction. This is a great way to stretch all the muscles on the backside of the body. We're also activating the core, we're starting to get things a little bit, the difficulty is increasing here now. So you might find that your body temperature is increasing, that's good. You should be starting to sweat, pie around this point maybe within a couple more exercises. The difficulty, the complexity is going to increase.

[03:05] And one of the things you might notice, so Victoria if you can let's do a modification, let's do a bent knee modification. So Victoria happens to have great flexibility but if her flexibility wasn't so good, she's going to come up like this, she's going to kind of tuck under and she's going to lower down with a bent knee position. That's going to allow her to get down there on the ground, walk herself out and she walks her feet up, she'll also do it in a bent knee position. Great job Victoria. Okay, about five more seconds guys, let's try to get one more. Okay, now up in standing we're going to take a move from Capoedo, okay we're going to do the ginga, we're going to go side to side so it's like a backward lunge. We bring one hand in front so yeah your defending hand up a little bit higher George, come up in front of the face and we go side to side. This is a great move, it helps with the wittily. They say it's a backward lunge, we go side to side and Capoedo has some very effective techniques and this is one of the base moves of Capoedo. I'm sure none of us are very good at it but still a fun exercise and it's a great variation of a lunge. Quebrera, it's a martial art from Brazil, it's also a style of dancing.

[04:10] This is one of their base motions, it's a great way to warm up the body, we've been back and forth, we have the coordination here, we're lunging back with one leg and back with the other. About 10 more seconds to go here and then we're going to do our walk out push up. So 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, okay now here shorter with stance, we're going to lower down squatting, we're going to walk out to the full push up position, hands underneath the shoulders, lower down then come back up. Try to stress getting a full range of motion here, so you squat all the way down, get your hands on the ground, you walk out, you get your hands underneath your shoulders, you don't want them far back, you don't want them too far forward. A good alignment, lower down, chest to the deck, press all the way up and back in the standing. Okay now we're about halfway into it guys, so 30 more seconds and you'll notice when they come back up into the standing position, we want to make sure our heels get on the ground before we stand up.

[05:12] And let's check out Victoria's former, so if you start to fatigue a little bit, it's okay to lower down your knees. It's also okay to restrict your range of motion if necessary, if you can't lower all the way down, what you don't want to have happen is lead with your head or collapse in the core, you want to keep the core activated at all times, maintain good alignment, ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Okay now back in the standing guys, we're going to come here feet together and lateral lunges going side to side. Imagine your feet are running on parallel lines here, we don't want our toes pointing too far out or too far in. When we take our step out too, we want to sit back into our heel, notice how the trail leg stays straight, the lead leg is the leg that bends. The hands raise up as a counter balance and that's also activating the muscles in the shoulders giving us a full body warm up. Remember functional training is about using all muscles of the body, not just one or two. Halfway there guys. And if you notice they're not working at a breakneck speed, the speed is enough to make sure that they're working but yet this isn't really a workout yet, this is mere a warm

[06:14] up, we're just getting the body warm and loose. If you're finding you're out of breath and you're about to pass out, you probably need to slow down a little bit and do a little bit less repetitions. Find your own speed and figure out what works for you. It's important to make the blood circulate everywhere and every muscle and every joint of our body prevent injuries. It's very important. Okay now we're in our stance, let's lower it down, we're going to walk out and we're going to do our push up with a lateral hold here, okay so we're going to come up, a lateral plank. We lower it down to the push up and back out. Alright guys, let's get on it. Walk out and once you get out into that push up position, you're going to maintain that push up position. So they're all the way down, you open up, you rotate, so notice how they rotate on their feet completely. They rotate, after they hold a 5 second hold, they lower back down. Good. If you find that a 5 second hold is not really challenging, try to hold it 10 seconds, try to hold 20 seconds, try to hold 30 seconds.

[07:14] Do the best you can. But 5 seconds usually does the trick and the key is you don't want your core to sag, you want to keep your hips up in the air. That's going to activate your obliques. Now if you're going to lower it down, if you can do a knee push up, so lower back down, look down to your knees, then you want to come up and then raise off your knees. Yeah, so that's totally acceptable. You can lower it down to your knees in order to do this. Okay, excellent. Now let's walk back up into the standing position and that's going to set you guys up in the perfect position for your air squat. So as you're here, you just want to lower down, thighs to parallel, hands up as a counterbalance, come back into standing, all the way up, all the way down. And you start breaking a sweat now. That's a good thing. Now if you notice key things here, their knees aren't going too far forward. The knees initiate the motion, but then they start to sit back and down. They don't round here at the back and collapse to keep themselves up. If you start to collapse, you probably need to shorten your distance, shorten the depth of your squat. You want to push down to your heels, you want to activate all the muscles in the posterior

[08:17] chain, your hamstrings, your glutes. After core activation, proper alignment of the spine. And there again, you're not trying to do as many reps as possible, you're just trying to do good repetitions, full range of motion. About 15 more seconds. Greeting is very important too. Inhale by the nose, exhale by the mouth. Okay, excellent work. Now let's walk out here, okay? And as we get down, we're going to get in the quadruped position, meaning I want my hands underneath my shoulders and I want my knees underneath my hips. A wide enough base so I have stability, but not too wide. Then I'm going to go opposite knee to elbow, extend, hold five, four, three, two, one, then back in. We're going to stay on the same side. You're going to stay on the same side, everybody. So you're just going to switch opposite knee to opposite elbow. Three, two, one, keep going and out.

[09:21] Five, four, three, two, one, two more times. Five, four, three, two, one, one more time. Five, four, three, two, one. Now let's switch sides. So get your stance in place, proper base and go. Five, four, three, two, one. Five, four, three, two, one, three more, five, four, three, two, one, two more, five, four, three, two, one, one more, five, four, three, two, one, one more, five, four, three, two, one. Excellent work. Now let's come around to a lying position, lying face up. Okay, and now we're going to do our straight up. Okay, so we're pouring our toes back towards us, hands over head. We're going to try to sit straight up and

[10:25] touch the ceiling here. Okay, and then we're going to lower right back down, right when the hands touch, right back up. We're going to finish off with one minute of this, and that will complete our warm-up. Remember this is not a race. This is just a warm-up. The importance of this is the form, and it's not the repetition. It's not the number of repetition. It's to be able to break a little bit of sweat and ready to go for a after, to be ready for a hard workout. That's a very good point, George. And if you notice, George is sweating. Everybody here is sweating. It's a difficult warm-up, but yet everybody's able to talk. Everyone's able to still interact. They're not to that point where, you know, they're filled with lactic acid. We're not working out yet. Just getting everything loose and ready. About 10 more seconds. Five more seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. Great job, everybody. That completed our warm-up, and now we're ready to attack

[11:28] the real workout. Congratulations, everyone. Hi, everyone. I'm George St-Pierre. Welcome to my balance and agility workout. This has been designed by Eric Owain, and he will lead us through it. Okay, hi, everybody. What we're going to do here is a workout. There's a body weight circuit, okay? There's no weights required. It's basically moving our body, and you're going to notice that there's a lot of stabilizations going up on one leg throughout. If you find that you're having a hard time doing it on one leg, you can always put down a balance leg on most of the exercises, but try to do it and just try to limit your range of motion if you're having a tough time. Okay, let's go and get started, though, guys. We're going to start off doing our lunges, a four-way lunge. Starting off with our feet together, we're going to rotate towards the right and lunge with our left leg touching down with our right hand, then opposite side. Going side to side, always coming back to center. And as we do this, we don't want to go out too far. I don't want to push my

[12:33] knees too far past my toes. I actually want to settle down into my heel each time. You guys are doing great. Now, five seconds left, and then we're going to switch and go into our lateral lunge. Okay, here with our feet together, and let's go side to side, lateral lunges. You won't try to imagine that your feet are running down parallel lines. That's a consistent theme throughout. You're probably going to hear that a lot in all the DVDs. Whenever you do a lateral lunge, we don't want our toes pointing out or in. Just straight ahead. Let your legs do the work. Almost there, guys. About five more seconds. This is what...this worked really much the inside of the leg. Yes, it works. Pretty much all the leg muscles. Now backwards, okay? So we touch down with the same leg, the same hand as the leg that we step back with. And the knee almost touches. We don't really want the knee touch. If it does,

[13:35] guys, I can just kiss the ground. Especially at home, if you do that on very hard floor, make sure you don't hurt your knees going down. Okay, now in our stance, we're going to step out and do our crossback lunge. Going side to side. Notice how we stand up all the way, then step behind and touch down with the same leg that's stepping behind. Same hand as the foot that's leading. Now your heart rate's probably starting to pick up. You're probably starting to sweat a little bit and that's good. Yes, I do. Alright, now here in stance, we're going to come forward and we're going to just flip our dumbbell up. Okay, so now it's up in this position. We're going to do what's called a driver. Alright, so what we're going to do is we're going to come up on our right leg. We're going to try to keep our left leg off the ground throughout and we're going to touch down with our left hand, trying to touch the dumbbell. Now

[14:36] make sure you're not too close. So George, actually come back to us a little bit, okay? Then we will have a good distance. The further the distance, the more difficult it is. Okay, ready and go. And as you come up, try to really stabilize the body. Notice that if I look this way, I'll fall down a lot of times. So you want to stay looking right at your target, touch and come up. Always fixing your point because like Eric said, if you look all around, you'll lose your balance 100%. Three, two, one, switch sides and your left leg now. Touch him down with your right hand. It is normal. You always have one side better than the other. You want to make sure you bend your leg a little bit as you go down. It's part squat, part bend at the waist. Going back and forth. This really challenges the balance and it works all the muscles in the leg. Just gives you healthy knees,

[15:39] healthy ankles. It's good for all the leg muscles and your core. Okay, great job. Now we're going to come over and do a rotation one now. Okay, so now we're going to step over to our left, bouncing on our right foot. We're going to try to turn across with our left and bring our body up and in straight. Yep, come all the way straight so you reach across. It's okay. If you lose your balance, just try to give a touchdown and get right back in the stance. That's natural and normal. If you're working on a surface that is smooth, it might be more difficult because of the... you're not in balance. If you're working on a hard floor, it makes things a little bit easier. Try to do this exercise barefoot if possible. Okay, great work. Now let's come back to center of the dumbbell and then a step over to our right. We come up on our left leg. We reach across with our right hand and then come back in the center. This work, all the muscle underneath the

[16:40] foot, including all the stabilizer and the ankle and the knees. This is something that we're not used to work. Most of these muscles, they're asleep for a normal human being in modern days. If you notice in most functional activities, including fighting, we spend a lot of time on one leg. Even if it's only for a moment, we still spend some time there. Okay guys, great job. Now here we're going to stay on this side, right? But instead of being on our left leg, we want to be up on our right leg. It won't be too far away from your dumbbell, but now you're going to be up on your right leg. You're going to try to touch across with your right hand. Try to reach and pull back up. So little variations throughout this and there are more variations you can do and you can almost imagine almost any angle you can reach that's within this range and on one leg we can do. We can do just our straight ones. We can do side to side. We can come and touch over. But for this DVD, we're just doing three variations.

[17:43] About five more seconds. Start to get really hard and now... Okay, good. Now back to center. We're going to take a step to our left. Alright, now we come up on our left foot and don't be too far away. So as you're up on your left foot, you're going to reach across with your left hand and try to pull your body back up in the center position. Okay? I find that sometimes right here inside your foot too, you'll find that you'll start to burn. Everybody's got a different spot that will start burning. Some people find that their hips do and if you find you you're collapsing every time, just shorten your range of motion. Sometimes just doing this. So maybe you don't even come close to the dumbbell, but to whatever uses your marker, that's okay. Alright guys, great job. Now let's take our dumbbell and just get it out of the way. And we're going to come back here into our position. Okay? Now what we're going to do here is we're going to come up on the

[18:44] one leg. So we'll choose our right leg this time and we'll try to take our arms out wide and we're just going to twist our body doing an airplane type motion. That's what we're going to call this. Going side to side. This I have a really hard time doing this. One of the keys is just activating the muscles here inside your core and trying to really keep all this active and take your time with the rotation. Don't go too quick. Just work at your own speed and that's time. Now we're going to come up here, get your breath onto your left leg now. We're going to kick out and do the same thing. This is something I really need to work on. I'm pretty bad at this movement. But that's part of the process for everybody. Everybody has things they're good at,

[19:50] things they're not so good at, and it's all about bringing balance back into the body. If you have to step down for a second it's okay. Regain your balance. Keep going. Almost there guys. Five more seconds. Okay. So now we're here. Now what we're going to do is we're going to do a jumping pattern and an X pattern. So we jump in, out, in, out back and forth. 30 seconds then we go to our line jump. We go back and forth in the circuit two times. Okay, let's go. You don't have to go too quick because the repetitions they accumulate as you're doing this. If you find however after you do this it's not really that difficult. You can always pick up the speed the next time you do it like this. But for now let's just go at a good speed. Don't kill yourself because you have a lot of work to go. Okay, Hakes. Okay, yeah exactly. It's an X hop. Now we're going to go side to side here, okay.

[20:55] So quick feet, side to side going forward, a few feet then going back. Keep a soft bend in the knees as you're doing this. That way to absorb the impact. Be more in your muscles not in your joints. You don't have stiff legs doing this. Ten more seconds guys. Five, four, three, two, one and right back on the X jump now, okay. Now you could feel your heart rate going up dramatically and that's normal, I can tell you. And this is part of what's, you know, the agility. We're moving our body back and forth. We're moving our feet quickly throughout. Not big explosive motions, just side to side quickly, changing direction quickly. That's a key component to fighting or anything. And let's go,

[22:01] line hops, side to side, moving forward and moving back. Ten more seconds. Let's go now. Seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Alright. Whew! Alright you guys, great job. Now we just finished the line hops. Now what we're going to do is a gorilla squat. We have a few different motions that are probably, you're not probably used to what we're doing here. It's a little bit different. The gorilla squat's basically this. I'm going to come down with my fists onto the ground almost like what a gorilla looks like when he's in, you know, he's just walking around. What I'm going to do is I'm going to brace all my hands. I'm going to put my weight forward here, hop up my feet and stand. Then I come back down, hop up and stand. We're going to go two in one direction, then turn and go two in the other,

[23:01] right, for 60 seconds. Everybody ready? And go. Just moving back and forth. And once you have the movement down, try to pick up speed here, guys. Yes sir! Good. Rotate. The whole idea here is you want to try to land almost with your thighs parallel. So when I land here, then I stand. So I'm going to do a full squat. Really get down deep, hop up and stand. Hop up, stand. About 25 more seconds. Like I said, once you have the movement down, try to be quick with it. Try to get a quick rotation, moving back and forth quickly. 15 seconds. Let's pick it up a little bit now, guys. Good. 10 seconds. Let's go. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Great job. Now our next

[24:07] exercise, we have what we call a mule kick. Somebody will call this like a frog, a bullfrog drill. What we're going to do here is we're going to come down under our hands, okay? And I brace my weight on my hands. My weight rocks forward and I kick up, down, stand. Hands down, kick up, and stand. If you find this a little too difficult, kind of freak you out a little bit. You can put your hands down, just lift your legs up and stand. It's important to go with the both legs at the same time. Yeah, you want to try to kick up both legs at the same time. And if you don't feel comfortable kicking up, just take your feet off the ground and stand up. Alrighty, guys. Let's go. One minute. And go. Nice, George. Excellent, Victoria. If you feel comfortable kicking up, you can. If you want to stay with that variation, that's fine. Good. I have to keep my core always tight. Guys, about halfway into it. Like I said, once you feel you have the motion, try to get a quick

[25:12] transfer from standing back down. So you try to get more repetitions in per minute. That's the whole idea. Really push it out, guys. This is a shorter workout than our normal workouts. So you can sort of push it a little bit harder because, well, you're not doing it as long. No intensity and duration. There's an inverse relationship there. 10 more seconds. Let's go. Let's push it out now. Eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Alrighty, good job. Now, our next exercise is our alligator crawl or a bear crawl. It kind of depends on the height that determines it, okay? So if we want to do the toughest variation, we want to keep just right above the mat. Notice how my elbow here is right next to my knee. That's what we want to do. We want to come up and then I want to come up and replace it. One, two. Notice how my hips are up there. Then they go backwards. One, two. Always putting my elbow right on my knee. If I have to raise up a little bit, that's fine. That's a fine

[26:17] substitution. We still have a lot of core activation, but we want to try to get as low as we can and try to stay low throughout. Alrighty, guys. One minute of this, moving back and forth. Adjust your height accordingly. There you go. And go. There are two forward and two back. George is a very strong person, so for him, one minute, he could probably go a couple of minutes if necessary. But if you find as you're doing this, after you do it a few times and you're starting to decay here, your whole body is collapsing, just relax. Hang out for a second like this and then try to get back at it as you can. If you find you get tired and you have to get back down your knees, that's fine. Right when you feel you're ready, push back through it. You've got 25 seconds, Victoria. Good job, George. Try to keep those hips down low though, okay? Hips low throughout. 20 seconds. In more seconds, let's go. Eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Okay, great job. Now,

[27:35] our next exercise. It's a floor pull-up with a pop-up. The key to this is as I'm down here in this prone position, I start with my arms in front of me. I'm going to pull up on my elbows, and that's how I kind of arch my back here and I pull myself forward along the line of the mat. Once I get here, I put my hands here by my side and I pop up, turn, face, lie down, and go in the other direction. Okay, and go. Turn face, lie down, extend those arms straight out, try to arch up, pull your elbows towards your hips, and pop up. Excellent. Pull, pop, stand, turn, lie down. Guys, you're doing a great job. Nice, George. Nice, Victoria. 30 more seconds. If you're losing

[28:39] your pants, doing this is because you need to lift up your butt off the ground. Try to raise your body and get up on your forearms there. Pull your elbows towards your hips. This really uses your lap muscles, and you have to use your extensor muscles of your spine, the spinal erectors, in order to keep your back up. If you flop over, there's going to be too much friction. Five more seconds. Try to get one more, five, four, three, two, one. Okay, now our last variation here of this round, and we're going to go back through and repeat all these guys. So we're not done, but this is the last one of this, and we're going to go back and repeat starting from the gorilla squat. We're going to do a lateral, a walking lateral push-up. Okay, so we're going to go side to side. Now notice what I do here. I touch my feet together as I cross one hand over, then I go out. My feet go out of that, okay? So we're going back and forth here. As we get to here, you can do a push-up one way like that. You can lower down your knees and do a push-up, and if you find you're just too tired, you can just lower down, but try to include this motion.

[29:42] This is the key. Over, under, out, push-up if you can, lower down if you have to, or just lower down your knees, relax, come back up, over, under, out. Okay? Yes, sir. One minute of this. Get ready and go. And George, just drop those hips down a little bit lower, okay? Good. Over, under. Okay, enjoy that. That's good. Now just come underneath. Yeah, with this hand, so your left hand's going to come underneath as you do that. You're going to go out. So over and over top, so you go over and under. Yep. Nice, George. Yeah, under, over, over, under, either way. It's acceptable. If you have to lower down, it's okay. Just try to regroup. You have 25 seconds, Victoria. Doing great, George. Try to really push through now, okay? We're almost there.

[30:46] 15 seconds. Try to finish strong. 10 seconds. Come on, George. Five, four, three, two, one. Okay, you guys did great, but you're not done, okay? We're going back through it all, starting at the gorilla squat, okay? Let's go. Let's get ready now. Trying to bump up right here. Let's go and stand. Stand, turn, and go. Try to be quick here now. This is it. We have five more minutes here. Turn quickly, then right back on it. Good. All right, George. Let's go, buddy. We have 30 seconds, more or less. 30 and change. Let's go. Should do at least 10 more of these. Back and forth. So 20 squats, so let's go.

[31:50] Let's push. Go, go, go, go, go. Come on, Victoria. Good. 15 seconds. Let's go now. 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Right into the mule kick, okay? Let's go. Hands down, kick up. Stand up. Let's go. Right into it. Okay, that's okay. You have to do the substitution. It's totally fine. Standing up each time. If you have to take a break, try to rest in the standing position here, okay? You got to take a little break in between. Take a couple breaths. That's fine. Find your own pace. If you're like George, just try to keep pushing. Okay, Victoria, let's get it. 30 more seconds.

[32:52] Shoulder is burning. Now, after my countdown, once I hit one, okay, I want you guys to go. Keep going. Now, you got 15 seconds. I want you guys to go right into the alligator crawl. Or if you have to raise your hips up a little bit higher, that's fine. I want you to try to stay as low as you can. Let's go now. 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, okay? Alligator crawl. Let's face out here towards the bags, down in the position, and moving back and forth now. 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2. You start the fatigue here, okay? Or you can lower down, get your breath, relax, and try to get right back on it. So here. Almost there, George. 30 more seconds. Good job, Victoria. Back and forth. That's it. Elbow to knee. Remember, elbow to knee. The lower you keep your hips to the ground, the more difficult it is, the more they raise,

[33:54] the less resistance you have. Come on, George. Let's go, buddy. 15 seconds. That's it. Push it out. Come on, Victoria. Try to finish strong. 10 seconds. On my countdown, you're just going to lie down. We're going to do our floor pull-ups and our pop-ups, okay? 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, lying down, floor pull-ups to a pop-up, okay? Arms extended straight out in front of you. Pull yourself forward, arching up. Elbows to hips. Get a lie down. After you turn around, let's go. Pull up, pop up. Good. Stand, turn, lying down. Let's go, George. All the way up. Good. Turn and lie down again. You guys are almost there. Tight up those abs. Yep. We have this exercise and one more, okay? 30 more seconds here. Pull, pop, turn, down. Come on, Victoria. You're doing great.

[34:57] Push it out. Let's finish strong, okay? 15 seconds now. Let's go. Come on. You got it. Pull. Hey, pop up. Excellent. Turn. Come on, George. 5 more seconds. Give me one more, buddy. All right. Now, down here. Walk. Push up if you can. Walk over. Walk under. And a push-up. Let's go. Let's get on it. Try to keep those hips down low if you can, George. Try to keep the hips even with your shoulders. Side to side, over, under. Yep. That's it. Down, back and forth. Let's go. This is it, okay? After this, we're finished. One more. Let's go. Victoria, try to drop your butt down a little bit, okay? The same line as your shoulders. That's going to force all of your muscles in your core to activate, okay? Yeah, take a break. It's all right. Try to get right back on it. You have 25 seconds, okay? Let's finish strong. Come on, George.

[35:59] 15 seconds. Let's go back. Come on. Let's go. One more. Over. Come on. Over this way. Let's go. One to the right. One to the left. Okay. Get it here. Five, four, three, two, one. Come on. High-type out. Ah, tap out. That was good work. Ladies and gentlemen, Eric Owings just made me tap out. Actually, you didn't because I finished it. Yeah, you finished it. So it was really happy. It was, you know, that's what happens. You know, see, just using this body weight, George is probably the epitome of conditioning. You saw what happened there. Victoria is also in amazing shape and you see that it doesn't take even any resistance. Just learning how to use your body the right way. You have the ultimate gym here. You have the ultimate workout. We pretty much just did in 20 minutes, but it might take some people hours or weeks to accomplish. Absolutely. The intensity that's in that is, it's amazing. Also, remember, everyone, if you could

[37:01] do this workout 100% with the perfect form, perfect timing and everything, you do this workout perfectly. That's mean this workout is not good enough for you. All right, you need to go to another level. If you're like me and you can't make it true, you know, without cheating sometime or not having the good form or, you know, skipping a couple of repetitions, that is normal. I don't ask you, we don't ask you to be perfect. We're all human beings. Even myself, I can't do this thing. Like, if I do the perfect form and the perfect timing, I can't do this perfectly. What you say, George, is safe to say that you're striving for perfection, but it's just that sometimes you're not able to do it. So what you have to remember at home is, although it's not perfect, he's not doing anything that's compromising his body. Anything that, although it might not look, you know, picture perfect on everything, he's not doing it to the point where he feels joint pain or pain with his body. He's pushing to his full potential. He's doing everything that he can do, but also keeping his body safe. I'm always looking for perfection. I'm always going to get closer to

[38:03] the perfection, but without never, unfortunately, never reaching it. Congratulations to everyone at home. You just got through that great workout. And we can say that we did a pretty good job ourselves as well. Thank you very much.
