TITLE: Bonus Workouts
SOURCE: Georges St-Pierre RUSHFIT — DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Rushfit Bonus Workouts Dvd.avi
RELEASE YEAR: 2010
DURATION: 1:34:53
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] Hi everyone, I'm Jacques Sainte Pierre. Welcome to my Rush Fit Warmup. This program has been designed by Eric Owens. The Rush Fit Warmup is a multifaceted warmup that uses only body weight motions and allows you to work every muscle of your body in a functional manner to get you ready for the work that comes in the rounds. So let's not waste too much time guys. Let's get started here with a shoulder width stance and we're just going to do some torso twist. So as you notice I want to get my elbows up about shoulder height. I can dip down a little bit, that's okay. And I pick a good pivot point on the ground. I want to rotate back and forth. Imagine that my elbows, if there's a line just about going about 180 degrees, if there's a sphere here, right? I don't want to go too far. I don't want to go all the way around here. I don't want to injure myself because remember we're just warming up. We're trying to get the body loose, core temperature up so we don't injure ourselves and we're ready for the work to come.

[01:02] Nobody is like an elastic. If you try to stress an elastic when it's cold it's gonna snap. If you try to stretch it when it's warm now you're gonna be able to play with it. Now we're doing each exercise for 60 seconds. So right now we have about 10 seconds left and then we're gonna switch and go into our next exercise which is a side bend. Let's keep going though guys. You have about five seconds. All right good job. So now here in our stance we're just gonna lean to one side, kicking our hip out, reaching over, then going to the other side. This is a side bend and what we don't want to do is we don't want to bend forward and then over. We want to keep our body stacked meaning knee, hip, shoulder, everything in alignment. We let the hip kick out to the side and we reach. This is gonna be stretching the muscles of the hips and of the lats and this is a very important movement pattern in most functional fitness and in fighting. You have to be able to move side to side as well as forward and backwards. Like every other exercise you start slowly and

[02:05] you try to pick it up as time goes on. Now we have about 20 seconds left in this and also work at your own rate. If you find you're starting to fatigue, the form is starting to go away, step back, maybe take a few deep breaths and get back at it. 10 more seconds guys. Warm up is very important. It prevents injuries and it allowed us to have our full range of motion. Okay great job. Now let's turn and face this direction and we're gonna come down onto our fingers walking out into the plank position and we're gonna walk our feet up to our hands. Need us to turn, switch directions and go back in the other direction. This is a great way to stretch all the muscles on the backside of the body. We're also activating the core. We're starting to get things a little bit. The difficulty is increasing here now. So you might find that your body temperature is increasing. That's good. You should be starting to sweat. Pile around this point maybe within a couple more exercises. The difficulty, the complexity is going to increase. And one of the things you might notice. So Victoria if you can, let's do a modification. Let's do a bent knee modification. So

[03:08] Victoria happens to have great flexibility. But if her flexibility wasn't so good, she's gonna come up like this. She's gonna kind of tuck under and she's gonna lower down with a bent knee position. That's gonna allow her to get down there on the ground, walk herself out and she walks her feet up. She'll also do it in a bent knee position. Great job Victoria. Okay about five more seconds guys. Let's try to get one more. Okay now up in standing we're gonna take a move from Capoedo. Okay we're gonna do the Jingo. We're gonna go side to side so it's like a backward lunge. We bring one hand in front so yeah your defending hand up a little bit higher George. Come up in front of the face and we go side to side. This is a great move. About fluidity. These days a backward lunge. We go side to side and Capoedo has some very effective techniques and this is when the base moves up Capoedo. I'm sure none of us are very good at it but still a fun exercise and it's a great variation of a lunge. Quebrera is a martial art from Brazil. It's also a style of dancing.

[04:09] This is one of their base motions. It's a great way to warm up the body. We've been back and forth. We have coordination here. We're lunging back with one leg and back with the other. About 10 more seconds to go here and then we're gonna do our walkout push-up. So five four three two one. Okay now here shorter with stance. We're gonna lower down squatting. We're gonna walk out into the full push-up position. Hands underneath the shoulders. Lower down then come back up. Try to stress getting a full range of motion here. So you squat all the way down get your hands on the ground. You walk out to get your hands underneath your shoulders. You don't want them far back. You don't want them too far forward. A good alignment. Lower down chest to the deck. Press all the way up then back in the standing. Okay now we're about halfway into a guys so 30 more seconds. And you'll notice as when they come back up into the standing position we want to make sure our heels get on the ground before we stand up.

[05:11] And let's check out Victoria's former. So if you start to fatigue a little bit it's okay to lower down your knees. It's also okay to restrict your range of motion if necessary. If you can't lower all the way down what you don't want to have happen is lead with your head or collapse in the core. You want to keep the core activated at all times. Maintain good alignment. Ears, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Okay now back in the standing guys. We're gonna come here feet together and lateral lunges going side to side. Try to imagine your feet are running on parallel lines here. We don't want our toes pointing too far out or too far in. When we take our step out too we want to sit back into our heel. Notice how the trail legs stay straight. The lead leg is a leg that bends. The hands raise up as a counterbalance and that's also activating the muscles in the shoulders. Giving us a full body warm-up. Remember functional trains by using all muscles of the body not just one or two. Halfway there guys. And if you notice they're not working at a at a breakneck speed. The speed is enough to make sure that they're working but yet this isn't really a workout yet. This is

[06:12] mirror. It's a warm-up. We're just getting the body warm and loose. If you're finding you're out of breath and you're about to pass out you probably need to slow down a little bit and do a little bit less repetitions. Find your own speed and figure out what works for you. It's important to make the blood circulate everywhere in every muscle and every joint of our body to prevent injuries. You know it's very important. Okay now we're in our stance. Let's lower it down. We're going to walk out and we're going to do our push-up with a lateral hold here. Okay so we're going to come up a lateral plank. We lower down to the push-up and back out. All right guys let's get on it. Walk out and once you get out into that push-up position you're going to maintain that push-up position. So they're all the way down. You open up. You rotate. So notice how they rotate on their feet completely. They rotate. After they hold a five second hold they lower back down. Good. And if you find that a five second hold is not really challenging try to hold it 10 seconds. Try to hold 20 seconds. Try to hold 30 seconds. Do the best you can. But five seconds usually does the

[07:16] trick and the key is you don't want your core to sag. You want to keep your hips up in the air. That's going to activate your obliques. Now Victoria when you lower down if you can't do a knee push-up so lower back down. Up down to your knees. Then you're going to come up and then she raise off your knees. Yeah so that's totally acceptable. You can lower down to your knees in order to do this. Okay excellent. Now let's walk back up into the standing position and that's going to set you guys up in the perfect position for your air squat okay. So as you're here you just want to lower down. Thighs the parallel. Hands up as a counterbalance. Come back in the standing. All the way up. All the way down. Already started breaking a sweat now. That's a good thing. Now if you notice key things here their knees aren't going too far forward. The knees initiate the motion but then they start to sit back and down. They don't round here at the back and collapse to keep themselves up. If you start to collapse you probably need to shorten your distance. Shorten the depth of your squat. You want to push down into your heels. You want to activate all the muscles in the posterior chain. Your hamstrings, your glutes. Good core

[08:20] activation. Proper alignment of the spine. And there again you're not trying to do as many reps as possible. You're just trying to do good repetitions. Full range of motion. About 15 more seconds. Greeting is very important too. Inhale by the nose. Excited by the mouth. Okay excellent work. Now let's walk out here okay and as we get down we're going to get in the quadruped position meaning I want my hands underneath my shoulders and I want my knees underneath my hips. A wide enough base so I have stability but not too wide. Then I'm going to go opposite knee to elbow. Extend. Hold five four three two one then back in. We're going to stay on the same side. Stay on the same side everybody. So you're just going to switch opposite knee to opposite elbow. Three two one keep going and in and out. Five four three two one two more times.

[09:27] Five four three two one one more time. Five four three two one now let's switch sides. So get your stance in place. Proper base and go five four three two one five four three two one three more five four three two one two more five four three two one one more five four three two one. Excellent work. Now let's come around to a lying position. Lying face up okay and now we're going to do our straight up okay so we're pulling our toes back towards us. Hands are overhead. We're going to try to sit straight up and touch the ceiling here okay and then we're going to lower right back down

[10:28] right when the hands touch right back up. We're going to finish off with one minute of this and that will complete our warm-up. Remember this is not a race this is just a warm-up. The importance of this is the form and it's not the repetition it's not the number of repetition it's to be able to break a little bit of sweat and ready to go for a after to be ready for a hard workout. That's a very good point George and if you notice George is sweating everybody here's sweating it's a difficult warm-up but yet everybody's able to talk everyone's able to still interact they're not to that point where you know they're filled with lactic acid we're not working out yet just getting everything loose and ready about 10 more seconds five more seconds five four three two one great job everybody. That completed our warm-up and now we're ready to attack the real workout. Congratulations

[11:30] everyone. Hi everyone I'm George Saipiart and welcome to my stretching for flexibility program workout with the designer of it Eric Owing. Okay guys what we're going to do here is a program that you're going to look at it's going to think it's a little bit easier than the other ones and it is but you shouldn't bypass this or think that it's not necessary this is the thing about this is like the kind of the yin to the yang this is a soft work okay so this is very necessary to maintain proper range of motion and to keep the body loose and flexible so you shouldn't bypass this routine you should definitely include it in your program some of the exercises seem easy and they are sort of easy but it's more about keeping your range of motion your joints healthy and functional okay so let's go ahead and start off here with our hands on our hips okay and we're just going to start off doing neck rotations making big circles and what we're going to do is go slow you don't have to go quick at all and the whole idea is going in 15 seconds in one direction and then we switch directions okay guys good and switch other direction and we kind of want to hit every joint in the

[12:40] body from head to toe in the beginning this is just loosening up the body if you've been working out hard all week you definitely need this okay great and now shoulder rotations going forward first and if you notice i kind of touch my palms right as i bring into the front or i'm sorry the back of my hand as i bring into the front this is important to prevent and switch directions prevent injuries and keep or join or joint healthy to have a better range of motion this is very important like i said this seems easy and it is relatively easy but necessary okay now we have spine rotations you notice this is the same as in the warm-up we're going to do a little bit slower and just try to stress a full range of motion really working on all the muscles that allows to rotate our body around our spine and this will just stay going for 30 seconds importance the importance of breathing

[13:44] remember keep thinking about it breathe through the stretch okay guys now we're going to clasp our hands and just rotate yeah just like that you want to try to go in one direction the whole time then we'll switch we'll go 15 seconds in the other direction this is trying to keep the wrist nice and healthy this is very important because the number of punches that i throw for and switch directions and the number of punches that i throw in training it's it's it's incredible so as with the impact it's really important to keep that joint healthy yes very okay now let's come here okay we're just going to switch to go inside the side imagine you're turning your hands up like you're looking at a tray you can do a little bend in the arms too this is keeps the elbows and the shoulders healthy kind of just turn look inside the side guys are doing great about 10 more seconds

[14:46] good okay and now hands on the hips and like we have a big hula hoop okay we're making big rotations here going around and if you feel comfortable you can go a little quicker and if you want you can stay moving slow if you feel a tight spot you can kind of hang around there for a second okay let's switch directions then the other direction now very important to have a full range of motion try to go as far as you can as long as it is comfortable you're not supposed to feel any discomfort okay now knees together a slight bend in the knees and knee rotation same thing we're going in one direction 15 seconds and then we'll switch and it's very important we do is to keep all the joints healthy not just one or two but all of them okay and switch sides under direction so this is a little slow we can find the starts picking up in difficulty as we start

[15:47] hitting the stretches we have one more here okay and that's going to be our ankles we're just going to get up on the ball over big toe and just try to pivot around there same thing go 15 seconds one side then other side guys 15 seconds to the inside and cold it's all it's very important also people forget about it because it's support the whole weight of our body almost 24 seven or not not 24 seven but almost the half half of the day switch sides you'll find if you know someone puts you in a foot lock and they break your ankle during the fight that's pretty much it can't really do too much this actually helps the body have a resistance to a joint lock because it's switch directions increases the range of motion a little bit and this will save you one day in the fight a lot of injury that happened to a lot of

[16:47] knees injuries are caused because of the this this stability of the ankle so it's very important to maintain that joint virality okay so now here we have our feet shoulder width okay we're going to do our forebends it's going to be a little more active now and what we want to do if you notice when I do the bend I'm coming with my hips are kicking back away from the center line I'm trying to touch down if I need to I can bend my knees but I want to try to reframe from that if possible so we're going to reach up and touch down touch the hips up touch the hips down we're always going to go back to the hips okay let's go guys and reach up touch the hips touch down up and down and like I said well I can't stress this enough this is the soft work this is very necessary we all want to do the hard stuff we only do the stuff that makes us sweat all the stuff that you know you feel the burn you feel like you're building strength endurance all that but don't neglect flexibility it's extremely important ying and yang yep this is the inside this is what they would

[17:49] call the soft side we train hard everyone but we train smart this is very important we need to be hard but sometimes we need softness as well to be calibrated very true guys you're almost there about 15 more seconds but if you know Victoria she has good flexibility she can get her whole palm on the ground that's great if you can do that but all means do so if you need to bend your knees a little you can do that too and you'll find out that you're getting more flexible as as the workout goes on because you get more warm doc and you're loosening up okay now let's come here and we're to go do our side bend but we're gonna exaggerate it unlike the warm up we're gonna kind of stick the one side for a few seconds then slowly transfer over to the other side you just want to go side to side on your own rhythm and if you find you're really tight take your time there kind of hang out for an extra few seconds everybody's got to kind of make their own personal variation of this

[18:51] excellent we're important to inhale as the stretch goes on keep breathing breathing through it through the stretch now these stretches like I said they kind of build a complexity as we go and we're almost at the end of this one and our next one we're gonna do is we're gonna come into a straddle position okay so we're gonna come right here like this we're gonna try to point our feet just like we're doing our lateral lunge we try to be running down parallel lines with our feet now we're gonna go side to side but we're gonna hold on one side for 30 seconds and then go to the other side okay so let's start by going to our right side that means our left leg's gonna stay straight we can stick our hands out and if you want there's no reason to force yourself too hard there with your arms you don't have to keep your arms you can just lower down here and hold that's totally acceptable you should feel this in your left adductor okay that's your inner thigh if you're not feeling it

[19:53] there you might have to adjust your foot position if your feet are turned in that way it might not work so we want our feet facing like I said parallel lines try to run out here a little bit longer and we're gonna come up and go the other side now this is a very especially for me that's a very important exercise because I got a I got an adductor pulled pulled my adductor during one of my competition and this is an exercise that I need to do every week to keep my my joint healthy this is very important for me yeah it also helps with kicking lunging pretty much everything that you're gonna do absolutely okay now let's come back to this middle position here okay and now we're gonna go through a single hamstring okay so we're gonna go first towards our left hamstring you just want to try to come down if you can tuck your head down to your shin that's fine but it's not necessary

[20:54] if you can just get here that's fine even if here you feel stretched that's fine try to find the range of motion that you feel the stretch and try to hang out there for a little bit and just don't forget to breathe a lot of people forget to breathe when they're stretching and that's not good you guys have to maintain a good position but a position where it allows you to still breathe normal and natural so now for here we're gonna come up into the neutral position and we're gonna switch and go to the other side now towards the right leg just try to relax the muscles you know fine sometimes if you're not getting enough of a stretch by contracting the muscle opposite so right now if I were to contract my quadricep muscle here I might feel a little bit more of a stretch in my hamstring if you want a little bit of an extra boost that's a good way of getting it okay great job guys now back up in the standing now we're gonna do a squatting

[21:54] the doctor stretch okay so we're gonna squat towards our right leg we're going to ball my foot here and my toes are pointed up in the air if I feel this one in the adductor as well too George absolutely and for you this is a very necessary stretch sometimes during some stretches you might especially if you feel if you're a little bit claustrophobic you might feel like you have a hard time breathing try to relax if it's really a really bad discomfort just come up and you know don't go that far you know you have to it's not good if you feel any discomfort doing this you have to go to the maximum but until it's until the point that it that is okay and switch no discomfort this is something to keep our so our body healthy it's not supposed to feel any pain you'll find once you become used to arrange a motion that's the kind of the key then your body will naturally allow you to go a little bit further each time try the force of your action to tear a muscle become

[22:55] less flexible in the end that's not really a good thing for anybody okay now let's come back here to a neutral position we're going to interlace our fingers behind our back and we're going to go forward we're going to stretch out both of the hamstrings and we can also stretch out our biceps our delts everything here this one challenge drop your head down to the ground and here again if you're everybody here is pretty flexible so if you're range of motion if you get here and you feel a stretch that's okay just hang out there if you find that you feel uncomfortable with your hands behind the back you can always just go down here and touch down this is definitely one one of the exercises that I need to work on my range of motion is pretty bad on this one okay let's come back up to a neutral position now we're going to turn we're going to face to our right coming down to our left knee now you want to make sure you don't leave your knee back too far we want to kind of bring the knee up underneath the hip and here we're going to do is we're going to focus on stretching our hip flexor which is this muscle

[23:55] right here and you'll find that all this stuff that we do in functional training is always using the hip flexors extensors our hips are used a lot and in fighting almost anything in life so what we want to do here is we want to contract our abdominal muscles and our glute muscles on our left hand side okay we're trying to keep everything here contracted holding that contraction keep the posture upright and press up with the left hand if you have tight latch your arm might go forward but try to get it straight up and you're gonna get an extra stretch there and try to lose that contraction if I lose the contraction you'll see this happen now I feel no more stretch it looks the same but really it's not it's this has to contract here contract here and that keeps my muscle stretching and I want to feel the stretch right here in the front of the body on the hip flexor it's got a few more seconds to go okay great job now we're going to lower down

[24:56] left hand to the ground we're going to come around and we're going to grab our right foot I'm sorry our left foot with our right hand and we're just going to feel the stretch now in the quadricep if you want you can kind of lean forward a little bit that'll accentuate the stretch but you don't have to go too far forward the main thing is just feel a little bit of a pause you find don't the flexibility to the grab it that's okay you can just kind of hang out there and continue doing your hip flexor stretch but if you can try to grab on and stretch out the quadricep a lot of people a lot of athletes when they finish working out they they always forget to stretch and to be honest I've been one of them for many years so this is really bad because now I need to get back to what I've lost for all those years yeah I'm not a very flexible guy as you can tell okay so now here we're going right to the opposite side okay so we're going to start with our hip flexor try to keep the knee right beneath the hip we're going to contract the abdominal muscles

[25:58] imagine trying to turn your zipper up the fascia so you contract your glutes your abs and then we're going to go straight up here with our right hand you know if you've watched the other dvds I'm sure you've seen how explosive George is and a lot that has to do with his hip flexors and his glutes and pretty much all of his legs but he would lose probably a lot of his explosiveness if he got really tight if he doesn't keep some flexibility it decreases all of his athletic attributes although it's not the thing that makes him explosive it's one of the components that gives him that ability all right good and I'll slow her down the right hand and we're going to reach behind with our left hand and grab our right foot and you want to if you can to try to align the heel with your leg okay you don't want your heel kicked out you want to try to keep everything close there and if you want to get a little bit more of a stretch just kind of lean forward not a lot just a little bit in the field right in your quadriceps in front of your thighs okay excellent now we're going to stay facing this

[27:07] way we're going to put our foot down and we're going to come into what they call downward dog and yoga but we're going to lace our left foot behind our right foot and we're just going to try to push our right heel down to the ground it's going to stretch out the calf of the right leg muscle if you can you want to get your heel to the ground trying to keep your hips high and if you find that it won't go all the way down that's okay don't force it hang out here for about 10 more seconds okay now we're going to take our left leg put on the ground lace our right leg behind our left leg and try to do the same thing and try to work our left heel down to the ground this one takes a little bit of strength in the shoulders too but

[28:08] so you might sweat a little bit as you're doing this it's a little bit more difficult than the other ones but that's okay a little bit effort isn't going to hurt you all right now we're going to put our right foot on the ground and we're just going to dive down like we're doing a hindu push-up we're going to put our hips down on the ground rolling over our toes and we're just going to look up this is going to stretch out the abdominals and a lot of the muscles in the front of our hips if you want to you can sort of contract your glute muscles and try to pin your hips down a little bit more but it's not really necessary unless you don't feel anything especially after you do the if you do this stretch this stretch after working after working out your abdominal you're really going to feel something okay now from this position we're just going to lower right back spreading out our knees a little bit trying to touch our heels to our butt and we're

[29:09] going to try to reach our fingertips away dropping our head down on the mat and we just want to try to feel the stretch coming right here down the side of the body on our lap muscles some people might feel it in the adductors too if you sprawl your legs out more that's fine but our main emphasis here is sit in our butt back towards our heels and reaching the fingertips away head down just breathing and relaxing guys are doing an excellent job that is a great stretch for the the lap lap muscle okay now we're going to come around facing this way and we're going to come up in the standing position here and how we're going to go into basically our side straddle here okay so I'm going to call this a split you can call it whatever you want we're just going to squat down and as we do we're just going to start to kick our legs out to the side and no big deal if you don't have high amounts of flexibility everybody here is pretty flexible but we're going to start

[30:09] off by going forward okay and I don't want to round the back I just want to keep my my basic body in good alignment try to work my way out here if possible going straight out front if I can lie all the way down awesome if not if I have to hang out here and also if my flexibility puts my legs here no big deal we just don't want to collapse here I want to keep myself nice and upright and eventually I should be able to improve my flexibility more and more and more okay and now from here we're going to come up to a neutral position we're going to turn and face our left leg and try to direct our chin towards our left toes point our left toes back towards us now we're still should feel an adductor stretch an inner thigh stretch but we also want to feel the hamstrings being stretched here as well now and we're trying to breathe and relax and sometimes people like to say move with the breath you hear that Latin yoga that's a fine way to stretch too so when you breathe in you kind of come out when you breathe out you move forward into the stretch okay guys now we're going to come

[31:14] up to neutral turn and face the right and go forward remember pull those toes back towards you move your chin towards your toes you want to feel throughout the inner thighs and the hamstrings as you don't have to keep arching your back on the good way not rounding your back like a cat there's no way we won't yeah whether or not I can touch my toes is irrelevant it's more about how I feel the stretch inside my legs okay great work now we're going to come with our feet together and now the sit and reach traditionally the sit and reach people just go like this to touch the toes and say good job I'm not really concerned whether or not you touch your toes I want to see more of this I want to see the toes come back towards you so we contract all the muscles here in the front of our shins okay our tibialis muscles all this we want to contract our quadriceps here we want to sit upright pulling the toes back we're going to put our fingertips down and try to push the heel of our palm forward done correctly you should feel a release of these muscles all throughout the posterior chain all the way from your Achilles all the way into your erector muscles if you find

[32:19] you can't even do this it's just too discomforting sometimes people like to do this just brace this usually does a great job for hitting the stretch as well if this is doing nothing just pushing forward okay excellent now what we're going to do here is we're going to take our left leg and just get it out of the way so we're just going to prop it up traditionally people do a hurtle stretch for this and that's okay but a lot of times it causes the collapse we don't really want to do that we just want to set our leg out the way and same thing we're going to contract our right leg now toes back towards us contracting the quadriceps imagine trying to put the back of your knee onto the ground just going to do posture upright and push forward trying to hold here for about 30 seconds and doesn't have to be exact as best as you just move along with us but if you want to do this on your own you can hold it longer each stretch or you can go a little shorter just whatever feels comfortable but 30 seconds is usually ideal and if you find you have some free time you want to go back to the whole routine again that's not going to hurt anything

[33:33] okay come back to neutral we're going to bring the left leg in move the right leg out pulling our toes back towards us contracting the quadriceps posture upright trying to move forward there again we should feel everything on the back side of our left leg releasing excellent victoria nice george and try to imagine you're pushing in right here there and you're trying to lift up throughout good the posture very important yes it's very important it's everything like this all righty good job now we can close up our legs here okay and let's go and flip around this way and we're just going to lie down okay so we're going to lie down here flat and what we're going to do is we're going to first do our glute stretch okay for our butt what we're going to do here is we're just going to come up we're going to grab our knee and we're going to pull it up towards our chest ideally here we just want to hold here for 30 seconds some people like to bring their head up to their knee that's okay but there's no reason to like force it here we're trying to our emphasis

[34:37] here on our butt we've been using our butt a lot too it's probably the strongest muscle in the body so you have to really be sure if you're working it correctly make sure you're stretching it too and from here we're going to make a quick transition we're going to grab our knee with our right hand and we're going to pull it across our body on a diagonal like this putting our left hand on the ground we're going to just turn towards our left we should feel the hip extensors here now stretching okay right here on the outside of our hips this is very important stretch just try to breathe and relax keep your mind focused and try to focus on getting a good stretch the whole entire time okay now back to center we're going to extend the left leg straight now we're going to take the right leg and we're going to pull it into our chest and do the same thing opposite side so starting off just doing the glute stretch

[35:38] I guess if you feel that you have a little more energy and you want to work a little bit harder you can try to touch your nose up here to your knee if it's not necessary you know just want to try to make sure really cup your knee and pull it up high okay now we're going to grab our right knee with our left hand pulling it across our body trying to touch down to the ground if you can't get it to the ground it's okay right arms up to the side we're looking to our right pull them with our left arm our right knee over to our left and we're almost there guys we're nearing the end okay good come back to center now we're just going to flip it around real quick and this is a way I really like to finish my workouts I think it's just good and it's it's good to have the

[36:38] the release of tension and it's something that's very important to learn you'll notice that we're fighting tensions what fatigues a lot of people a lot of times so what we're going to do here is just going to lie down and we're going to make a fist out of our body okay so when I say clench you're just going to make you're going to try to cause as much tension throughout your whole entire body as you can I'm going to say relax you're going to breathe out and just relax you can take a couple of deep breaths then I'm going to say clench you're going to take a deep breath in clench then I'm going to say relax you're going to breathe out and just kind of melt into the mat okay so let's everybody take a deep breath in clench relax breathe in deep clench relax okay we have three more of these breathe in deep clench

[37:46] relax two more times breathe in deep clench relax here comes our last one deep breath clench relax now just take your time and then you can take a few seconds to relax in here yeah you can even take a few minutes if you feel like it you can stay here as long as you want just kind of reward yourself for all the hard work you've done all week and when you're ready you can come up and that pretty much finishes the workout but if you want to stay there a little bit longer that's totally okay this is this is very important because every day my body will receive a lot of a lot of impact either because of the because of the strike because of the take down also the the all the mechanic of the movement of

[38:51] in martial art that i'm doing and it's important to have something that that release release all the those tensions that i have so to to to keep the balance this this is very important to keep my body very healthy you know if i would never do that it would short up my career these kind of training make my career longer you know you keep me healthy and that's why it's so important for me that's why you guys should do it it's important every time you train hard we train hard it's true but we have also to train we have also to train smart which is even more important congratulations everyone and let's go to the next step hi everyone i'm jorge sampear welcome to my rush fit warm-up this program has been designed by eric owens the rush fit warm-up is a multifaceted warm-up that uses only body weight motions

[39:57] and allows you to work every muscle of your body in a functional manner to get you ready for the work to come in the rounds so let's not waste too much time guys let's go and get started here with a shoulder width stance and we're just going to do some torso twist so as you notice i want to get my elbows up about shoulder height they can dip down a little bit that's okay and i pick a good pivot point on the ground i want to rotate back and forth imagine that my elbows if there's a line just about going about 180 degrees if there's a sphere here right i don't want to go too far i don't want to go all the way around here i don't want to injure myself because remember we're just warming up we're trying to get the body loose core temperature up so we don't injure ourselves and we're ready for the work to come nobody is like an elastic if you try to stress on elastic when it's cold it's gonna snap if you try to stretch it when it's warm now you're gonna be able to play with it now we're doing each exercise for 60 seconds so right now we have about 10 seconds

[40:57] left and then we're going to switch and go into our next exercise which is a side bend let's keep going though guys we have about five seconds all right good job so now here in our stance we're just going to lean to one side kicking our hip out reaching over then going to the other side this is a side bend and what we don't want to do is we don't want to bend forward and then over we want to keep our body stacked meaning knee hip shoulder everything in alignment we let the hip kick out to the side and we reach this is going to be stretching the muscles of the hips and of the lats and this is a very important movement pattern and most functional fitness and fighting you have to be able to move side to side as well as forward and backwards like every other exercise you start slowly and you try to pick it up as time goes on and we're about 20 seconds left in this and also work at your own rate if you find you starting to fatigue the form starting to go away step back maybe take a few deep breaths to get back at it 10 more seconds guys warm up is very important it

[42:01] prevents injuries and it allowed us to have our full range of motion okay great job now let's turn and face this direction and we're going to come down onto our fingers walking out into the plank position and we're going to walk our feet up to our hands need us turn switch directions and go back in the other direction this is a great way to stretch all the muscles on the backside of the body we're also activating the core we're starting to get things a little bit the difficulty is increasing here now so you might find that your body temperature is increasing that's good you should be starting to sweat to apply around this point maybe within a couple more exercises the difficulty the complexity is going to increase and one of the things you might notice so victoria if you can let's do a modification let's do a bent knee modification so victoria happens to have great flexibility but if her flexibility wasn't so good she's going to come up like this she's going to kind of tuck under and she's going to lower down with a bent knee position that's going to allow her to get down there on the ground walk herself out and she walks her feet up she'll also do it in a bent knee position like great job victoria okay about five more seconds guys let's try to

[43:05] get one more okay now up in standing we're going to take a move from capoeira okay we're going to do the ginga we're going to go side to side so it's like a backward lunge we bring one hand in front yeah your defending hand up a little bit higher towards come up in front of the face and we go side to side this is a great move about fluidity basically it's a backward lunge we go side to side and capoeira has some very effective techniques and this is one of the base moves of capoeira sure none of us are very good at it but still a fun exercise and it's a great variation of a lunge capoeira it's a martial art from brazil it's also a style of dancing yeah and this is one of their base motions it's a great way to warm up with the body we've been back and forth we have the coordination here we're lunging back with one leg then back with the other about 10 more seconds to go here and then we're going to do our walkout push-up so five four three two one okay now here shorter with stance we're going to lower down squatting

[44:11] we're going to walk out to the full push-up position hands underneath the shoulders lower down then come back up try to stress getting a full range of motion here so you squat all the way down get your hands on the ground you walk out to get your hands underneath your shoulders you don't want far back you don't want them too far forward a good alignment lower down chest of the deck press all the way up then back in the standing okay now we're about halfway into a guys so 30 more seconds and you'll notice as when they come back up into the standing position we want to make sure our heels get on the ground before we stand up and let's check out victoria's form here so if you start to fatigue a little bit it's okay to lower down your knees it's also okay to restrict your range of motion if necessary if you can't lower all the way down what you don't want to have happened is lead with your head or collapse in the core you want to keep the core activated at all times maintain good alignment ear shoulder hip knee ankle okay now back in the standing guys we're going to come here feet together and lateral lunges going side to side try to imagine your

[45:16] feet are running on parallel lines here we don't want our toes pointing too far out or too far in when we take our step out too we want to sit back into our heel notice how the trail legs stay straight the lead leg is a leg that bends the hands raise up as a counterbalance and that's also activating the muscles in the shoulders giving us a full body warm-up remember functional training is about using all muscles of the body not just one or two halfway there guys and if you notice they're not working out a out of breakneck speed the speed is enough to make sure that they're working but yet this isn't really a workout yet this is mirror it's a warm-up we're just getting the body warm and loose if you're finding you're out of breath and you're about to pass out you probably need to slow down a little bit and do a little bit less repetitions find your own speed and figure out what works for you it's almost important to make the blood circulate everywhere and every muscle and every joint of our body prevent injuries you know it's very important okay now we're in our stance let's lower down we're going to walk out

[46:17] and we're going to do our push-up with a lateral hold here okay so we're going to come up a lateral plank we lower down to the push-up and back out all right guys let's get on it walk out and once you get out into that push-up position you're going to maintain that push-up position so they're all the way down you open up you rotate so notice how they rotate on their feet completely they rotate after they hold a five second hold they lower back down good and if you find that a five second hold is not really challenging try to hold it 10 seconds try to hold 20 seconds try to hold 30 seconds do the best you can but five seconds usually does the trick and the key is you don't want your core to sag you want to keep your hips up in the air that's going to activate your obliques now victoria when you lower down if you can't do a knee push-up so lower back down up down to your knees then you want to come up and then she raise off your knees yeah so that's totally acceptable you can lower down to your knees in order to do this okay excellent now let's walk back up into the standing position and that's going to set you guys up in the perfect

[47:18] position for your air squat okay so as you're here you just want to lower down thighs the parallel hands up as a counterbalance come back in the standing all the way up all the way down already start breaking a sweat now that's a good thing now if you notice key things here their knees aren't going too far forward the knees initiate the motion but then they start to sit back and down they don't round here at the back and collapse to keep themselves up if you start to collapse you probably need to shorten your distance shorten the depth of your squat you want to push down into your heels you want to activate all the muscles in the posterior chain your hamstrings your glutes good core activation proper alignment of the spine and there again you're not trying to do as many reps as possible you're just trying to do good repetitions full range of motion about 15 more seconds breathing is very important to inhale by the nose exhale by the mouth

[48:22] okay excellent work now let's walk out here okay and as we get down we're gonna get in the quadruped position meaning i want my hands underneath my shoulders and i want my knees underneath my hips a wide enough base so i have stability but not too wide then i'm going to go opposite knee to elbow extend hold five four three two one then back in we're gonna stay on the same side just stay on the same side everybody so you're just going to switch opposite knee to opposite elbow three two one keep going and and out five four three two one two more times five four three two one one more time five four three two one now let's switch sides so get your stance in place proper base and go five four three two one five four three two one three more five four

[49:36] three two one two more five four three two one one more five four three two one excellent work now let's come around to a lying position lying face up okay and now we're going to do our straight up okay so we're pulling our toes back towards us hands over head we're going to try to sit straight up and touch the ceiling here okay and then we're going to lower right back down right when the hands touch right back up we're going to finish off with one minute of this and that will complete our warm-up remember that this is not a race this is just a warm-up the importance of this is the form and it's not the repetition it's not the number of repetition it's to be able to break a little bit of sweat and ready to go for after be ready for a hard workout that's a very good point george and if you notice george is sweating everybody here's sweating it's it's a difficult warm-up but yet

[50:39] everybody's able to talk everyone's able to still interact they're not to that point where that you know they're filled with lactic acid we're not working out yet just getting everything loose and ready about 10 more seconds five more seconds five four three two one great job everybody that complete our warm-up and now we're ready to attack the real workout congratulations everyone hi everyone i'm george simpiaire welcome to my balance and agility workout this has been designed by eric owing and he will lead us through it okay hi everybody what we're going to do here is a workout there's a body weight circuit okay there's no weights required it's basically just moving our body and you're going to notice that there's a lot of stabilizations going

[51:39] up on one leg throughout if you find that you're having a hard hard time doing it on one leg you can always put down a balance leg on most of the exercises but try to do it and just try to limit your range of motion if you're having a tough time okay let's go and get started though guys so we're going to start off doing our lunges a four-way lunge starting with our feet together we're going to rotate towards the right and lunge with our left leg touching down with our right hand then opposite side going side to side always coming back to center and as we do this we don't want to go out too far i don't want to push my knees too far past my toes i actually want to settle down into my heel each time you guys are doing great about five seconds left and then we're going to switch and go into our lateral lunge okay here with our feet together and let's go side to side lateral lunges you want to try to imagine that your feet are running down parallel lines that's a consistent theme throughout you're probably going to hear that a lot and all the dvds whenever you do a

[52:42] lateral lunge we don't want our toes pointing out or in just straight ahead let your legs do the work almost there guys about five more seconds this is what this work really much the inside of the leg yes worse pretty much all the leg muscles now backwards okay so we touch down with the same leg the same hand is the leg that we step back with and the knee almost touches we don't really want to let the knee touch if it does get on can just kiss the ground especially especially at home if you do that on very hard floor make sure you don't hurt your knees going down okay now in our stance we're going to step out and do a crossback lunge go inside the side you notice how we stand up all the way then step behind and touch down with the same leg that's stepping behind same hand as the foot that's leading

[53:47] now your heart rate's probably starting to pick up you're probably starting to sweat a little bit and that's good yes i do all right now here in stance we're going to come forward and we're going to just flip our dumbbell up okay so now it's up in this position we're going to do what's called a driver all right so what we're going to do is we're going to come up on our right leg we're going to try to keep our left leg off the ground throughout and we're going to touch down with our left hand trying to touch the dumbbell now make sure you're not too close so george actually come back just a little bit okay and we want to have a good distance the further the distance the more difficult it is okay ready and go and as you come up try to really stabilize the body notice that if i look this way i'll fall down a lot of times so you want to stay looking right at your target touch and come up always fixing your your point because like george said if you if you look all around you'll lose

[54:48] your balance 100 3 2 1 switch sides and your left leg now touching down with your right hand it is normal you always have one side better than the other you want to make sure you bend your leg a little bit as you go down it's part squat part bend at the waist going back and forth this really challenges the balance and it works all the muscles in the leg just gives you healthy knees healthy ankles it's good for all the leg muscles and your core okay great job now we're going to come over we want to do a rotation one now okay so now we're going to step over to our left bouncing on our right foot we're going to try to turn across with our left and bring our body up and in straight yep come all the way straight so you reach across it's okay and if you lose your balance just try to give a touchdown to get right back in the stance that's natural and normal if you're working on on a surface that is smooth it might be more difficult because of the the you're not in balance

[55:54] if you're working on a hard floor it makes things a little bit easier try to do this exercise bare foot if possible okay great work now let's come back to center of the dumbbell and then a step over to our right we come up on our left leg we reach across with our right hand and then come back in the center this work all the muscle underneath the foot including all the stabilizer and the ankle and the knees this is something that we're not used to work these most of these muscles they're asleep for a normal normal human being in modern days and if you notice in most functional activities including fighting we spend a lot of time on one leg even it's only for a moment we still spend some time there okay guys great job now here we're gonna stay on this side right but instead of being on our left leg we want to be up on our right leg it won't be too far away from your dumbbell but now you're going to be up on your right leg you know try to touch across with your right hand try to reach and pull back up

[57:00] so little variations throughout this and there are more variations you can do and you can almost imagine almost any angle you can reach that's within this range and on one leg we can do we can do you know just our straight ones we can do side to side we can come and touch over but for this DVD we're just doing three variations about five more seconds start to get really hard and now okay good now back to center we're gonna take a step to our left all right now we come up on our left foot and don't be too far away so as you're up on your left foot you're gonna reach across with your left hand and try to pull your body back up in the center position okay so if I find that sometimes right here inside your foot too you'll find that you'll start to burn everybody's got a different spot that will start burning some people find that their hips do

[58:02] and if you find that you you're collapsing every time just shorten your range of motion sometimes just doing this so maybe you don't even come close to the dumbbell which whatever uses your marker but that's okay all right guys great job now let's take our dumbbell and just get it out of the way and we're gonna come back here into our position okay now what we're gonna do here is we're gonna come up on the one leg so we'll choose our right leg this time and we'll try to take our arms out wide and we're just gonna twist our body doing an airplane type motion is what we're gonna call this go inside to side this I have a really hard time doing this one of the keys is this activating the muscles here inside your core and trying to really keep all this active and take your time with the rotation don't go too quick just work at your own

[59:03] speed that's time now we're gonna come up here get your breath onto your left leg now we're gonna kick out and do the same thing this is something I really need to work on I'm pretty bad at this movement but that's part of the process for everybody everybody has things they're good at things are not so good at and it's all about bringing balance back into the body yeah if you have to step down for a second it's okay regain your balance keep going almost there guys five more seconds okay so now we're here now what we're gonna do is we're gonna do like a jumping pattern and an x pattern so we jump in out in out back and forth okay 30 seconds then we go to our line jump we go back and forth in the circuit two times okay let's go you don't have to go too quick

[1:00:03] because the repetitions they accumulate as you're doing this if you find however after you do this it's not really that difficult you can always pick up the speed the next time you do it like this but for now let's just go to at a good speed don't kill yourself because they have a lot of work to go like I Hakes okay yeah exactly it's the next hop now we're gonna go side to side here okay so quick feet side to side going forward a few feet then going back keep a soft bend in the knees as you're doing this that would absorb the impact be more in your muscles not in your joints you don't have stiff legs doing this 10 more seconds guys five four three two one and right back on the x jump now okay

[1:01:09] okay and that's now you could feel your heart rate going up dramatically and that's normal I can't tell you and this is part of what's you know the agility we're moving our body back and forth we're moving our feet quickly throughout not big explosive motions just side to side quickly changing direction quickly that's a key component of fighting or anything and let's go line hops side to side moving forward moving back 10 more seconds let's go now seven six five four three two one all right whoo all right you guys great job now we just finished the line hops now what we're going to do

[1:02:13] is a gorilla squat we have a few different motions that are probably you're not quite used to what we're doing here it's a little bit different the gorilla squats basically this I'm going to come down with my fists onto the ground almost like what a gorilla looks like when he's in you know he's just walking around what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna brace all my hands I'm gonna put my weight forward here hop up my feet and stand then I come back down hop up and stand we're gonna go two in one direction then turn and go two in the other right for 60 seconds everybody ready and go just moving back and forth and once you have the movement down try to pick up speed here guys yes sir good rotate the whole idea here is you want to try to land almost with your thighs parallel so when I land here then I stand so I'm doing a full squat really get down deep hop up and stand hop up stand

[1:03:18] about 25 more seconds like I said once you have the movement down try to be quick with it try to get a quick rotation moving back and forth quickly 15 seconds let's pick it up a little bit now guys good 10 seconds let's go five four three two one great job now our next exercise we have what we call a mule kick some people call this like a frog a bullfrog drill what we're gonna do here is we're gonna come down under our hands okay and I brace my weight on my hands my weight my weight rocks forward and I kick up down stand hands down kick up and stand if you find this a little too difficult kind of freaks you out a little bit you can put your hands down just lift your legs up and stand it's important to go with the boat leg in the same time yeah you want to try to kick up both legs at the same time and if you don't feel comfortable kicking up just take your feet off the ground and stand up all righty guys let's go one minute and go nice George

[1:04:25] excellent Victoria if you feel comfortable kicking up you can if you want to stay with that variation that's fine good I have to keep my core always tight guys about halfway into it like I said once you feel you have the motion try to get a quick transfer from standing back down so you try to get more repetitions in per minute that's the whole idea really push it out guys this is a shorter workout than our normal workouts so you can sort of push a little bit harder because well you're not doing it as long no intensity and duration there's an inverse relationship there 10 more seconds let's go let's push it out now eight seven six five four three two one all righty good job now our next

[1:05:25] exercise is our alligator crawl or a bear crawl we it kind of depends on the height that determines it okay so if we want to do the toughest variation we want to keep just right above the mat notice how my elbow here is right next to my knee that's what we want to do we want to come up and then I want to come up and replace it one two notice when I hit start to then I go backwards one two always put my elbow right on my knee if I have to raise up a little bit that's fine that's a fine substitution we still have a lot of core activation but we want to try to get as low as we can and try to stay low throughout all righty guys one minute of this moving back and forth adjust your height accordingly here we go and go we're two forward and two back now George is a very strong person so for him one minute he could probably go a couple minutes

[1:06:26] if necessary but if you find as you're doing this after you do it a few times and you're to start the decay here you know your whole body's just collapsing just relax hang out for a second like this and then try to get back at it as you can if you finally get tired and have to get back down your knees that's fine right when you feel you're ready push back through it you've got 25 seconds Victoria good job George try to keep those hips down low though okay hips low throughout 20 seconds 10 more seconds let's go eight seven six five four three two one okay great job now our next exercise it's a floor pull-up with a pop-up the key to this is as i'm down here in this prone position i start with my arms in front of me i'm going to pull up on my elbows you know how i kind of arch my back here and i pull myself forward along the line of the mat once i get here i put

[1:07:31] my hands here by my side and i pop up turn face lie down and go in the other direction okay and go turn face lie down extend those arms straight out try to arch up pull your elbows towards your hips and pop up excellent pull pop stand turn lie down guys are doing a great job good nice George nice Victoria 30 more seconds if you're losing your pants doing this is because you need to lift lift up your butt off the ground try to raise your body and get up on your forearms there pull your elbows towards your hips this really uses your lap muscles and you have to use your extensor muscles of your spine the spinal erectors in order to keep your back up if you

[1:08:33] flop over there's going to be too much friction all right five more seconds try to get one more five four three two one okay now our last variation here of this round then we're going to go back through and repeat all these guys so we're not done but this is the last one of this and we're going to go back and repeat starting from the gorilla squat we're going to do a lateral a walking lateral push-up okay so we're going to go side to side now notice what i do here i touch my feet together as i cross one hand over then i go out my feet go out of that okay so we're going back and forth here as we get to here you can do a push-up one way like that you can lower down your knees and do a push-up and if you find you're just too tired you can just lower down but try to include this motion this is the key over under out push up if you can lower down if you have to or just lower down your knees relax come back up over under out okay yes sir one minute of this get ready and go and George just drop those hips down a little

[1:09:40] bit lower okay good over under okay enjoy that's good now just come underneath yeah with this hand so your left hand's going to come underneath as you do that we'll go out so over and over top so you go over and under yep nice George yeah under over over under either way is acceptable if you have to lower down it's okay just try to regroup you have 25 seconds Victoria doing great George try to really push through now okay we're almost there 15 seconds try to finish strong 10 seconds yeah come on George five four three two one okay you guys did great but you're not done okay we're going back through

[1:10:43] it all starting at the gorilla squat okay let's go let's get ready now kind of pump up right here let's go and stand stand turn and go try to be quick here now this is it you have five more minutes here turn quickly then right back on it good all right George let's go buddy you have 30 seconds more or less 30 change let's go show do at least 10 more of these back and forth so 20 squats so let's go that's bush go go go go go come on Victoria okay good 15 seconds let's go now 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 right into the mule kick okay let's go hands down kick up stand up let's go

[1:11:57] right into it okay that's okay you have to do the substitution it's totally fine standing up each time if you have to take a break try to rest in the standing position here okay you have to take a little break in between take a couple breaths that's fine find your own pace if you're like George just try to keep pushing okay Victoria let's get it 30 more seconds shoulder is burning now after my countdown once I hit one okay I want you guys to go keep going now you got 15 seconds I want you guys to go right into the alligator crawl or if you have to raise your hips up a little bit higher that's fine I want you to try to stay as low as you can let's go now all right five four three two one okay alligator crawl let's face out here towards the bags down in the position and moving back and forth now okay one two one two one two one two you start

[1:13:06] the fatigue here okay or you can lower down get your breath relax you try to get right back on it so here almost there George 30 more seconds good job Victoria back and forth that's it elbow to knee remember elbow to knee the lower you keep your hips to the ground the more difficult it is the more they raise the less resistance you have come on George let's go buddy 15 seconds that's it push it out for me to try to finish strong 10 seconds on my countdown you're just gonna lie down we're gonna do our floor pull-ups and our pop-ups okay five four three two one lying down floor pull-ups to a pop-up okay arms extended straight out in front of you pull yourself forward arching up elbows to hips yeah lie down after you turn around let's go pull up pop up good stand turn lying down

[1:14:12] let's go George all the way up good turn the lie down again you guys are almost there tight up those ass yep we have this exercise and one more okay 30 more seconds here pull pop turn down come on Victoria doing great push it out let's finish strong okay 15 seconds now let's go go you got it pull hey pop up excellent turn come on George five more seconds give me one more buddy all right now down here walk push up if you can walk over a walk under and a push up let's go let's get on it try to keep those hips down low if you can George try to keep the hips even with your shoulders side to side over under yep that's it down back and forth

[1:15:13] let's go this is it okay after this we're finished one more let's go Victoria try to drop your butt down a little bit okay the same line as your shoulders that's gonna force all of your muscles in your core to activate okay yeah that's a break it's all right try to get right back on you have 25 seconds okay let's finish strong come on George 15 seconds let's go back come on let's go one more over come on over this way let's go one to the right one to the left okay get it here five four three two one high type out ah tap out that's good work ladies and gentlemen Eric Owings just make me tap out actually you didn't because I finished it yeah you finished it so it was really happy it was you know that's what happens you know see just using this body

[1:16:17] with George is probably the epitome of conditioning you saw what happened there Victoria's also in amazing shape and you see that it doesn't take even any resistance just learn how to use your body the right way you have the ultimate gym here we have the ultimate workout we pretty much just did in 20 minutes but it might take some people hours or weeks to accomplish the intensity that's in that is it's amazing also remember everyone if you could do this workout 100% with the perfect form perfect timing and everything you do this work out with this workout perfectly that's mean this workout this workout is not good enough for you all right you need to go to another level if you're like me and you can't make it true you know without cheating sometime or not having the good form or you know skipping a couple repetition that is normal I don't ask you we don't ask you to be perfect we're all human being even myself I can't do this thing like if I if I if I do the perfect form and the perfect timing I can't do it do this perfectly what you say George is safe to say that you're striving for perfection but it's just that sometimes it's not you're not able to do

[1:17:21] it so what you have to remember at home is although it's not perfect he's not doing anything that's compromising his body anything that although might not look you know picture perfect on everything he's not doing it to the point where he feels joint pain or pain with his body he's he's pushing to his full potential he's doing everything that he can do but also keeping his body safe I'm always looking for perfection I'm always gonna get closer to the perfection but without never unfortunately unfortunately never reaching it congratulations to everyone at home you just got through that that great workout and we can consider we did a pretty good job ourselves as well thank you very much okay now I'm going to explain to you how to use the rush fit assessment in your own program the assessment consists of four exercises squats push-ups sit-ups and burpees you're going to spend 60 seconds on each exercise and you're going to try to do as many repetitions as you can

[1:18:24] per exercise there's a 20 second break in between each exercise it's very important when you do these exercises there's only four exercises you can do them pretty much anywhere that you can find a little bit of space it just requires your body weight but it's very important that you use proper form you don't want to do more repetitions at the cost of form naturally as you start to fatigue a little bit of a decrease in form is to be expected but if you start to have a complete decay of the movement you want to rest come back and give it your all in the beginning you might find that the numbers aren't exactly what you would hope they to be in comparison to george or just maybe what you thought you could do but you'll find that if you stick with the program you keep working at it every time you come back and test you should notice an increase in your performance which associates to an increase in your overall fitness this is the gsp rush fit assessment you're gonna be doing four exercises squats push-ups sit-ups and burpees 60 seconds each 20 seconds in between you're gonna give your best effort and test yourself push yourself

[1:19:29] let's go three two one go deeper george all the way up all the way down let's go that's it 10 seconds down 50 to go faster deeper full extension as you come up come on all the way up all the way down let's go george move buddy 20 seconds down 40 seconds to go get deeper with those squats thighs parallel each time let's go come on george at the halfway point 30 seconds pick it up now all the way up all the way down all the way up all the way down let's go move it 25 seconds all the way up all the way up each time come all the way up 15 seconds we're almost there let's go george come on go go go 10 seconds eight seven six five four three two one okay get ready for the

[1:20:34] push-ups now right you have a 20 second break go to lower it down to your knees get your hands in proper position i'm going to give you a countdown three two one when it's time to go at three two one you want to come up into the push position get ready you want full extension once you go all the way down the way up get ready three two one go I said all the way up all the way down everything you got here george 10 seconds down that's it get a good rhythm excellent george that's it 20 seconds into it let's go all the way up all the way down looking great 30 seconds into it halfway come on george almost there buddy 20 seconds push it out now let's go

[1:21:37] 15 seconds come on don't give up let's go 10 seconds nine eight seven six five four three two one time 20 second break you have sit-ups coming up next okay yes all right breathe relax 10 seconds let's get ready and three two one go that's it all the way up all the way down let's go use those arms create momentum okay you can drive those arms elbows down towards your hips 10 seconds down let's go george excellent let's go 40 seconds to go

[1:22:43] halfway pick it up now okay everything you got 20 seconds come on joints push it out buddy 10 nine eight seven six five four three two one great job standing up now we have the toughest one last okay the burpees a 10 seconds george get yourself in stance get ready three two one go this is it george let's go explode up the ground jump back hop up let's go in the air back up jump good that's it go back and forth

[1:23:43] come on george let's go get after buddy 45 seconds i pick it up now george halfway let's go everything you got 25 seconds 20 seconds 15 come on george almost there let's go 10 nine eight seven six five four three two one time that's the worst day of my life

[1:24:47] but that's what i need hope you have fun everyone we need to enjoy this the release of pain after the training maybe not the training itself but the release of pain when you finish that's what is good get rush fifth super everyone great job just finished our workout now it's time for the cool down at the cool down it's very important we're not going to do a long cool down sequence but the exercises they're pretty much what they're doing is resetting your neuromuscular system so that you can go back into your daily life without having your muscles cramp and tighten up we're really going to stress a lot of the muscles around our hips okay that's where we did a lot of work also our lats our shoulders our chest pretty much the whole body but we're going to do the most

[1:25:50] effective stretches that we can do in the shortest amount of time this routine should be no more than five minutes five six minutes okay so let's go and start down here on our left knee right knee up okay what we're going to do is we're going to stretch the hip fletcher so i'm going to contract my abdominal muscles trying to tuck my glutes right up here up underneath me trying to tilt my pelvis under then when i reach my left arm straight up in the air fingertips pointing out towards the left and i should feel the stretch coming right in here now we just want to lift our chin up while maintaining this contraction all right looking straight ahead contracting in the abdominals glutes stretches right up here in the front if the arm goes for because you have tight lats try to force it up there in the air okay we have about 10 more seconds so just hang in there good really really feel the the flexor the hip flexor exactly okay great now we're going to come up we're going to turn face the other way lower down to the right knee take your time here now okay let's go ahead and set everything in position so we're going to contract the abdominals and the glutes and press straight up

[1:26:56] and we're holding here for 30 seconds now 30 seconds is pretty much the minimum here we we just want to do at least 30 seconds to make sure we you know we stretch out the body but if you find you're enjoying this don't be afraid to go back through this routine you know do it one more time two more times as much as you want these are great stretches you really can't get enough of these there is a lot of benefit to gain from stretching okay now let's come up here now you can do a butterfly stretch which patrick is going to demonstrate or you can just lower right down here into the side straddle everybody's flexibility is different but if possible we just want to try to splatter legs out here keep the posture upright then we want to go forward you see the variation that patrick's doing is working the same muscles trying to stretch with the adductor muscles right here in our inner thigh okay what i'm trying to do is i'm basically just pushing out so is george and we're trying to go forward if we can we want to lie down flat here and hold your stretch for 30 seconds i remember when i used to be a kid i used to go all the way

[1:28:04] down now as i'm growing up getting older it's not it's impossible to do the same thing because i didn't practice enough okay good now let's close up here legs straight ahead now what we want to do i mean we just don't want to touch our toes we want to pour our toes back towards us contract our quadriceps sit nice and upright fingertips pointed down we're pushing forward the heel of our palm if you find that to be too difficult by going forward like this and you just it's way too much you can just do this brace your hands right here by your hips push up try to keep your posture upright still pulling your toes back still contracting your quadriceps and just trying to eventually lean forward once you can break 90 degrees going forward you can probably take your hands off and push forward really good for the posterior chain I'm straight, you're tall, over back this is what you need to do now let's turn to our right

[1:29:06] i'm going to kick my left leg around here bring my right leg in now if you notice i stick my knee straight out from my hip and i form a 90 degree angle here a 90 degree angle here now what i want to do is i want to try to go forward putting my head all the way down to the ground everybody has a different flexibility level though so the key thing is is to try to lean towards your left on the stretch if your left leg's back lean towards your left even if you have to stay upright if you can lower down all the way that's great if you're right here that's fine this is for the extensors this is for the muscles on the outside of the hip a lot of jumping kicking all those motions we've really worked those muscles pretty much anything functional using the extensors and the flexors and now let's rotate around this is kind of cool we're going to lean to our right and swing to our left and we come right back this way take your time getting into position though so again you want your left knee in front of your left hip you want to try to create a 90 degree angle here and 90 degree angle here and same thing try to lie forward

[1:30:12] and if you have to there's you don't have to push forward maybe you don't want to feel any type of tearing or a really strong pulling just a slight pull in the muscles and the muscles that we're trying to feel are the muscles right outside here okay some people might feel a little bit up in the back you should be feeling it all over some people might feel a little bit of hamstring for the most part you want to feel it on the outer part of your left hip here trying to lie down always a side that you're that you're more flexible than the other that is completely normal okay now we're just going to kick back and through underneath so in the quadruped position so if you notice we start out here with our knees right underneath our hips right and what we're going to do and our hands underneath our shoulders we're just in a strong foundation we're going to extend our right hand forward then our left hand forward now what I want you to do is drop your butt back while keeping your fingertips out there trying to touch your butt to your heels and trying to get your armpits down to the ground once you do that you're trying to inch your fingertips away as much as you can and when we're doing this we want to feel the stretch

[1:31:17] coming right down throughout the lats okay some people find that they spread their knees out here they also get a adductor stretch here as well that's that's good he gets you know get more flexibility in and I happen to have a loose adductor so I don't feel anything in the adductor but I have tight lats this really stretches my lats every time you're really lucky me I'm tight pretty much everywhere okay guys great now we're going to come up here into this kneeling position and what we want to do is we want to put our knees together our heels together we want to sit back here under our butt we're going to interlace our fingers behind our back here the most important thing is that I start to straighten my arms that's more important than how high they get that first they get straight then I retract my shoulder blades meaning I try to pull my shoulder blades together once I do that I raise up as high as I can and I want to feel stretched throughout my biceps my deltoids my pectoral muscles all of that and there's almost an infinite amount of stretches but we we don't want to spend all day

[1:32:21] stretching you guys just did a hard workout so we just want to you know hit some of the ones that really get the body back to where it was before you did your workout good Patrick you know it's George is very tired here so this is a great stretch for him absolutely everybody else has good flexibility I should do this stretch more often yeah don't be scared that if you do something that you're not good at that's me you need to work on it like you can see this stretch it's I'm pretty bad at it that is something that I should put more time into it okay buddy that's time and that concludes our cool down so you have to remember that the cool down although it seems like it's easy and it's almost like it's a part of the workout everyone wants to forget the do we did all the hard stuff you know we warm up because we want to get ready for the hard workout then we do the cool down but sometimes we forget to do remember don't forget the cool down it's actually it's going to allow you to it's going to help you to recover and to come back so you can be consistent workout on a regular basis it's very important that you do all parts of the workout and you try to be as consistent as possible because that's what leads to progress if you just you know coming on occasion and you'd like do like maybe a round or two and then you know you skip a few days you're

[1:33:22] not going to see the results that you're looking for the results are going to come through consistency that's what's important thing and the consistency is given to you by allowing your body to recover properly which is why we do the cool down and also the cool down is not only physical for me I use the cool down as as a way to change my mind I start from being the athlete George St. Pierre the fighter when I work when I when I work out I'm the fighter I'm a martial artist but the cool down allowed me to make the transition by being the fighter to the everyday normal guy so it's more than an actual workout it's also the the changing of your mind putting your mind back into what it should be in everyday's life great job everybody

[1:34:22] so
