TITLE: 3D Shoulder Workout | Bro Split
VIDEO ID: c17-tkIZ6-Q
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c17-tkIZ6-Q
UPLOAD DATE: 2023-11-13
DURATION: 23:08
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:03] What a day it's been. Hello everyone. Good day, good evening, good morning, good whenever the this is for you watching it. Black Friday is upon us, so all the stress is coming out and I love it. It's every year. It's good time. But it's late on a Friday evening. Mr. Aiden and I are training. Yes, sir. Um, shoulders, no presses. I know there's lots of updates that need done. Everybody's been curious. We've been stupid busy, as you can see. Cool It's awesome. Hydraulic 2 popping off. Thank you everybody for your support. And you'll be happy to know we have we are going to be adding two more delicious flavors. You're not allowed to find out yet, but let me say that if you were a fan of sour you're going to love them. Two delicious scoops. High octane we're talking here. Little bit of demo day. So, you know, I own a supplement company and somehow I have I lost every single shaker that I have in this building like a I have a warehouse full of

[01:06] them, but we'll send John there on Monday. So, we're going to do the Jay Cutler. I hope everybody's doing well. I appreciate all the support. Elf is back, ladies and gentlemen. Elf Farmfed for you. This is its 20th year anniversary with for Elf the movie. Yes. Somehow Warner Brothers decided that Seth Feros and Ax and Sledge was the brand to collaborate with Elf on. I couldn't see it with another brand. You're right, dude. I couldn't. No, it's awesome. It's uh it's very cool and I appreciate all of the support from all of you with it because the flavors are delicious. We have four flavors. Ice sugar cookie, maple syrup on pancakes. That's a good one. It is the best in my opinion. It's good. uh white chocolate spice, Christmas in a protein shake, and then we also have peppermint bark. So, those four, they are all delicious. I still got to make some Ninja Creamies with them. That That's I need to do. So, it's been a minute since the last video we did because we're so busy and all the shit's hitting the fan. However, uh I have put on some weight this morning. I

[02:07] was 213.6. Very excited about it. However, I've had some I've had a little bit of a hiccup. Earlier this week on Monday, I was training chest and my elbow just all of a sudden like went off the rails and I thought I was gonna I thought I did something to it and tore my tricep again. It hurt that bad. Maybe if I just shove a bunch of BPC in there and like growth hormone and it'll get better somehow. And I'm like, Seth, that's not the answer. And then it got thinking in my head and Bob had mentioned he's like, maybe it's arthritis. I'm like, if this is arthritis, I feel bad for every comment I ever made about old people bitching about their arthritic hands or anything they had going on cuz this hurt. So, I woke up yesterday morning and no more pain. Hold the on. Maybe it is arthritis. It doesn't hurt right now. I feel strong. I'm not with it today. We're going to do shoulders, no presses today. So, we're going to do a fuckload of side sides. We're going to do some upright rows. We're going to do front raises. We're going to do different variations of front raises so you guys can see all the different ways to do it. Because if you can't do raises, say your shoulder hurts or like

[03:07] something hurts with presses, whether it's your elbow, your shoulder, something, but you're able to do raises, front raises, side raises, rear delt raises in different ways, upright rows, some shrugs, you can get one hell of a shoulder workout. And that's what we're going to do today, ladies and gentlemen. I like being this weight. Like 215 is going to feel pretty good. I'm only a couple pounds away. I don't want to creep up to 220 cuz I already had to get I already started wearing 2XL I went from 204 and now we're up. You know what else is really cool here? All the decals in the gym. Oh, awesome. The big ax and sledge. The absolutely massive all-American rough neck. The big HWMF over in the corner. I don't have problems, just more work to do. see that every day cuz you don't have problems. You just got to do work. That's all you got to do. There's people in the world with real problems. Every day they deal with them and all you have to do is go to work and be a good That's one of the other sayings I have here. I've been saying

[04:08] this lately. I ain't dead yet. Little morbid, somewhat dramatic, but it's me. What do you expect, huh? Little intense. I ain't dead yet. And I've been saying it lately as of recent for a while because every time something intense occurs or I want to go after something in life or there's an issue that comes up and it's really heavy, it's intense or someone is like it's just it's overbearing. Uh, and after I go through it logically and I say to myself, I ain't dead yet. I don't got any problems. Just work. So why don't we shut the up and do it? Why don't we rip some and do as much good as we can in this life while we're alive? Cuz I ain't dead yet. So, every day I'm going to look at that. Cuz I'm not. I'm going to keep living.

[05:17] Okay, warmed up. I did three warm-up sets. Uh, we're going to rip through sides. That's why I was doing warm-up sets on sides. I did the 25s, 35s, and the 45s. Now, I'm going to start at the 50s, do the 50s, do the 60s. Kind of feel it out. Probably hang out in that 60 65 range. We'll do four work sets. Last set we'll do a nasty drop set. Um, we'll probably run the rack in in increments of 10 down. If my top sets at 65, we'll go 65, 55, 45, 35, 25. Um, and in between sets, okay? Like whenever I go from the 65 down to the 55, I'll probably like give it like an 8 to 10 second break in between to let the blood flow to my shoulders. So that way I get I'm letting all the blood flow. And then like as I go it'll get more and more difficult, more and more pumped. And uh yeah, what we're going to rip through since there is no presses in this entire

[06:19] workout. Um we're going to focus on exhausting the muscles as much as possible without presses. So that means don't be a I have done a lot of recreational drugs in my life. And whenever it's late night Fridays, Aid and I training in here, there is nothing like training like a

[07:19] savage. There is nothing like it. I've done a lot of crazy in my life, dumb But this stuff will always be king. Heat. Heat. I love front raises. Dumbbell front raises. I love them. You'll see me get into the like I just We're not egotistical here. We're watching ourselves grow. We're watching seeing how things work. Like we're enjoying this. This is our time. This is why this shit's so cool. So,

[08:21] with front delts, again, this is my my cut. I've been teaching everyone in the office how to make these cuts because it looks cool and makes your traps look big and your cap your delts capped even more. Um, but whenever you're doing front raises, I'll pronate it. I'll supate. You'll see me do those different variations. You'll see me like start to go out. Okay? However, the heavier you go, the more risk of injury you're running with here. So, but I never go above like eye level. and the neutral. I take the top of the dumbbell to my eye level. That's as high as I'll go. Okay? Cuz I in there, I'm watching all this crazy happen with my front delts. I'm like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah." And since we're not doing presses, we can do more of these because it's not really a real workout if you're not doing presses. It's like girl math. That's what we've been talking about in the office. It's been a joke. So again, like you can see it all work and I want to I want to get in the good lighting and I want to get into a zone and just move. Now, what I

[09:23] was getting at with the tip, that's the first thing. The next is where you grab the dumbbell. Okay. If I grab the dumbbell all the way to the top and my hand is here as I'm coming up, it's going to hit my front delt different than if I pull my hand all the way back. Okay? Cuz it's going to pull on my arms, shoulders, biceps. It's going to pull differently on my body. You can see it happening like the weight's forward versus the weight being backwards. It's going to hit different. Still doing front paces, everybody. But as you're doing it, you just want to see how it feels and manipulate the exercise so that you can get the most benefit. And you're going to watch it while it's occurring. Now, 40 lb dumbbells can be heavy. So, you pick the weight that you feel comfortable with so you can get the motion and the vibe and the feel from. Okay? Do not over complicate this and do not try and do things faster than necessary. You should take the time to learn your body, learn

[10:24] the exercises, and watch your physique transform right before your eyes in front of the mirror. Me personally, I like all of them. However, I really like holding it back. But once you get super heavy with these things, it's inevitable for it to slip through your hands and it to go back here. So, just pay attention. Be mindful. It pays to be in shape, too. Do your cardio. I think that's my biggest advantage right now with everything is that I'm in really good shape cardiovascularly. I've never been in this good cardiovascular

[11:25] shape like in my entire life. So like doing this and then putting on some muscle training hard like this again. I love it. Still need to eat more I believe. I still don't think that I'm getting in calories enough calories consistently every single day. I'm still like underestimating my needs just because it's still in my head and making sure that I don't get like like ch super chubby. It's got it's thick boy season. You got to eat. And I was telling him last night, Hannah made um one of the reasons I think I got like a really good pump. But I still think I should have ate more than I did today. Last night she made like a homemade chicken pot pies, but like just the pot pie filling in a crock pot and then biscuits. Like you'd open the biscuit up and then put the pot pie stuff on top of it. I ate like six of them last night. Three at dinner and then three for a late night snack. But I don't do that every day. And I probably should I need to up the calories. I'm just still little by little. And then me hurting

[12:27] hurting my elbow this week, which is crazy. Dude, I was bitching up a storm this whole week and now like nothing. So I took it easy this week, but now I feel good. Next week we're gonna push limits again. Typical gym bro. I know. I thought about it. I was like, you know what? I was like, I have a bottle with Deca. Nope. Nope. I'm gonna call the doctor and get it from him. They ain't pretty, but they work. It's like old school stuff. So, this is the one exercise that I get a little I get a little extra in there. However, I think personally whenever I was building my physique years ago, it was that whole trap into the delt round it off. Like you can see the rear delt starting to fill up again. Get the seven on the back. that

[13:28] But the upright rows, the heavy upright rows, they pull on your upper traps and then you get to yank up into it all. Get a little rhythm with it, baby. Aiden's doing calves. If you haven't met Aiden, meet Aiden. Hey, We have grown quite the uh the meatthead crew here at Pumptown. Uh, but Aiden's doing makeshift calves cuz we don't have a calf machine. So, every time he does uh

[14:29] he does cal does calves, I got to jump in. But, so face pulls, I don't do them like everybody else does them. Um, I do a different variation of them. Your rear delts. So, your rear delts are incredibly small. They're one of the smallest muscle groups on your body. So, they're difficult to hit because it's easy for your stronger muscle part, your bigger muscles to take over in certain exercise. So with rear delts, they can change how you look from the front and from the side and from the rear. We want to achieve this seven look you heard me talking about before. So it's like it just it's that cut that the separation between your delt and your tricep and it goes all the way back and it just like from the side like a seven. Okay. So with rear delts that we're trying to achieve because you can see it right there. And if you have a bigger rear delt, it kind of pushes you pushes your delts up and it gives you more capped delt. That threedimensional look that we're trying to achieve. And then from the side, you're like, "Fuck,

[15:29] dude." Yeah. The bigger the rear delt, the bigger you look. And then from behind, same thing. You need the rear delt to tie everything together. So, whenever you see me doing a lot of training, I do everything instinctively based on poses. So, how do I look when I'm posing? Because I want to look good. That that's the reason I train. I like to look good. I like to feel good. And as I was doing my front raises and I'm watching myself grow. If I'm doing these things whenever I hit a crab, like that's what I'm envisioning. All this funky cool happening. Now, whenever I'm doing face pulls, I'm going to lighten this. Just for demonstration purposes, whenever I'm doing these, most people would have this high and they pull their face, which is effective. Okay, it is. But me, the way I like to do them is I'll bend over, keep my head up, and I'll pull here. Okay, and as I'm pulling back, I'm going to focus and feel and pull this rope out

[16:31] with my pinkies, okay? And feel it in my rear delts. And as I get heavier, I just stay in this. I lock my shoulders and I don't use any lat. I don't use any bicep. I feel all in my rear delts. Now, the reason I'm not doing this, okay, even though it is effective and you do feel it, and I like this like head slightly up but down, is because whenever I go to hit, everybody knows whenever you set your feet in a rear double bicep, set your hands above your head and then pull down. So the face pulls that we're doing like this slightly head slightly up and you're pulling them back is the same as you throwing your arms up. You're looking to the same head up and you're hitting that rear double body so that your rears are you're up.

[17:32] You guys get it. You you see me. You following. So that's how I like to do rear delts. And I'm not doing anything the dumbbells because we did some heavier upright rows and I was hitting my rears. So, I'm going to do these. Man, I keep doing all my rear delt stuff, but I'm not feeling it. Got to take time to feel it and to take time to make that connection with your rear delts rather than just doing, you know, the reverse pec deck on this massive range of motion and just take all your traps and midback and your rhomboids are just taking all of it. And you're not growing any of your rear delts because you're using bigger, stronger muscles, not so much the rear delts that you're trying to hit.

[18:50] So I like dumbbell shrugs. I like heavy dumbbell shrugs. However, bro, I have not done I have not done uh heavy shrugs consistently in years. So, I mean, I'm enjoying getting back into it. Uh, but I prefer dumbbell over barbell. Both are very effective. I think that if you're young and you're trying to build a physique, you must do both. You don't have to do both in the same workout. However, I do suggest possibly alternating back and forth so that you can see and assess how your physique changes and how you feel after doing them. But for the most part, heavy dumbbells, you have to do shrugs. If you want big traps, you have to shrug and you have to move some weight. So, um, it just takes time. Making the connection is very important. You're never going to have traps that meet the bottoms of your ears if you don't do shrugs. You have to. So, uh, every single shoulder day or back day,

[19:51] depending on the program that I was building, I'd have shrugs on there. And there was times whenever I would do heavy dumbbell and heavy barbell or heavy barbell with then some lighter behind the back so I could pinch them at the top and get the feel. Or I'd have heavy dumbbell with that. Shrugged. You got to do them. And most of you guys know and have figured out by this time that I'm a volume guy with heavy weight, like moderate to heavier weight. Row split jack gym juicy. And if you do that, like I'm figuring out that I can't train like I used to cuz I'm not on the same amount of I used to be. But that doesn't mean you can't enjoy it and have a good time. We'll get back to the 150s. Shrugging the 150s again at some point. It takes some time though. I wish my head was small again. me had thoughts, you know. I mean, I'm I look back at videos and I'm like, man, look how tiny my head was. Just because that was so big, you know, meatthead stuff, thick boy

[20:54] stuff. I don't even know what's for dinner tonight, but I'm excited to eat it. Uh, but I'm going to finish up with a couple more sets of shrugs here. I'll do the 120s. But everybody, I cannot thank you enough for the support. It is beautiful. Black Friday is upon us. The entire team here for Ax and Sledge, All-American Rough Neck, Just Work, have been working their asses off for this event. We are giving away a ton of cool for Axe and Sledge and for All American Rough Neck. Um, bigger deals than we've ever done, cooler giveaways than we've ever done. People in the demo crew, you're going to have the opportunity to come here and train, get on the podcast, do all kind of cool that everybody wants to do here with us. So, uh, we're we're doing it up. It's going to be great. So, thank you for all the support. Most important thing in life is be a good I cannot stress it enough. At times like these, whenever you see um uh the world going crazy in certain aspects, be true to yourself. Don't be a piece of Men's mental

[21:57] health awareness month. Um some people, you know, scoff at this type of and blow it off. I am one hard However, there are times whenever I get in a really rough spot. And um the people around me, even Aiden and these youngsters that are in here training, there's days whenever I see them training, it just makes me feel better about what we have here and how special it is. So, if you see somebody, if you're in a really good spot and you see somebody that's not doing too well, another guy or just in a rough spot or somebody's going through some and you aren't at this time, you are in a good spot. You're stronger than ever. reach out to him. Be a good That's what I mean when I'm saying be a good Be be some whenever someone needs something and you have the strength to help them in there, do that, okay? Be a good And as always, always slap the old lady on the ass and let her know that you love her. And you guys have yourselves a beautiful day.
