TITLE: Fxck Around & Find Out | Chest & Shoulders w/ The Young Bucks
VIDEO ID: CnIVBAjD3Wg
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CnIVBAjD3Wg
UPLOAD DATE: 2024-08-30
DURATION: 27:02
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] How did you come to be? So glad. Okay, so we're working up to one all out set of 15 to 20 with good form, but you're going to fail within 15 to 20. And then for second set, we're going to do the same weight and it's going to be a triple rest pause. So, you're going to do as many as you can the first time. You're going to fail, take 15 deep breaths. Going to go until failure again, 15 deep breaths, and one more time of going until failure. So. I'm And I said, "I'm not doing that Not doing it." I'll just do some straight sets cuz I'm getting back into it. We're warming up the oven. You're just like jamming your dick right down my throat right now. No. Like this will be my first like chest workout back. Yeah, cuz I haven't been doing like like crazy bodybuilder chest workouts, so. Ty's running the show. He inside it you.

[01:00] It's like It's like No, I'm not I'm not prepared for this. was on the live. He's like, "You want to hit chest?" Yeah. with everybody. He's asking what to do with these snapping turtles he found. I don't give a about the snapping turtles. All's I want to know is he wants to change chest and tries tomorrow. Yeah, I'm like I'm like said, "No, buddy. Okay, so all right. Know your demographic." Let's lift weights. Come on. No. Got it. Got

[02:09] Good. Come on. Another one. Good. Got it. Take a few deep breaths and get back in. Okay, last one here. Let's go. Come on. Come on, Todd. Come on. Nice. All right, you're up, babe. Deeper. Deeper. Deeper. There you go. Open up. Squeeze. There we go. Come on. Squeeze. There you go.

[03:10] Come on. Another Finish it. Another one. Another one. Another one. Come on. Good. Got it. Push. Good. Stay tight. Slow down. There you go. Good. Fight it. Fight it. Come on. Good. Come on. That's just got to

[04:13] Good. Good. Come on. Another one. Another one. There you go. Come on, one more. Good.

[05:14] Come on. Let's go. Come on. Good. Thank you. I'm not fed, hydrated. Rawdog. I'm rawdogging this There ain't no I ain't eating no Anadrols in 5 years. This is an Anadrol workout. Here we go. That's I stand corrected. This isn't insulin workout. This is the type of workout I would do when I be like carved out of my mind. If you recall some of the things back in the day, we were looking at old videos. Yeah. dude. If you uh Like if you hear me talking about how I would eat less than 10 g of fat in a day

[06:15] with gummy bears and buckets of rice, that's when I might be taking a little tinge of insulin. Just a tinge. Maybe some pre-workout, maybe some post-workout, maybe some before meal one. Six carb shakes a day. Look, yeah, I ate 875 carbs today. How'd you get that to work? Muscle cells, too.

[07:34] Come on. Awesome. Good. Come on. Awesome. It just doesn't go away. I don't know if it's ever going to. But there's no way I'm not I'm not nearly not even close to being as strong as I was earlier this year when we were training. And it's like But there's a lot of things that play into that, too. Yeah, and especially over the past few weeks with Hannah being down. Like,

[08:35] dude, I have like I was telling you guys earlier. Bro, I haven't been sleeping good. I haven't been training. I haven't been doing my cardio the same. Like, just 3 days a week of either training or cardio. It's not like 3 days a week of cardio and 3 days a week of training. It's been You know, I was listening to a podcast for several weeks, and it's like, I was listening to a podcast the other day, and they were talking about down downsizing when you get out of bodybuilding. And obviously, we know we can't go off of science all the time, but it says that if you put like a decent amount of stress on a muscle at least two times a month, it's signaling to your body to keep it. Well, I mean, dude, you know, we can say anything we want about certain things. Dude, everybody's We genetics play a huge role in this. Some of your other guys that when they retire, they just wither to nothing. Yeah, I mean, just a genetically short, thick, stocky guy. My dad, my mom, like you see in my family, we're all thicker people. I'm the only one that dabbled into the dark side of decades of gear, but I mean, before

[09:38] Dude, getting under 210 lbs for me is difficult. Cuz I also like to eat. Let's not pretend I don't eat a lot of food. I like at night time I eat a lot of food. But, even Cutler, like you look at Cutler, bro, he's still a big And bro, whenever he and I talk off talked off camera, like it was still I mean, we're on camera now, but he's like, "No, dude." He's like, "I'm not doing anything crazy." He's like, "It's just this is where I am." And you know what I mean, like you look at me now, I'm like, "Yeah, oh look, you still have muscle." But, dude, it's not what I normally would look like if I was training hard. Cuz when I was 203 last year doing functional stuff, I was lean. Like lean. It's not that I'm not lean now. It's not like I was. Not like I was. Oh, bro, every time he eats I he eats his dinner after dinner. He poses after he eats. He knows he gets the Oh, bro, I mean, tell him. Yep. I'll move that food around. We were eating steaks last night, huh?

[10:40] Beef and rice, pose half an hour later. Oh, dude. He eats more He eats more than than I do at certain meals. That's awesome. It's wild. So, now we're in debate about what's going to be the third exercise. Ty says Ty says dips. I don't want to do dips cuz of my elbow and being a little bit of a But, that also got me thinking of how much times have changed cuz he's we're doing chest and triceps. And I'm like in my head, I didn't tell these guys yet. We didn't say this off camera. What happens if everything that I ever did in my whole career, cuz now everybody has this this philosophy of training, and it seems to be working for people, right? Like very well. It's like a great overall way of working. Like for He's doing a similar type, you're doing yours. What happens if what I did only work for me? Man. That means all of my great grand wonderful philosophies in my head are just for me.

[11:42] But I think they worked. But they did work. Doesn't say there's there's no thinking if they did. They did work. But what if they only work for me? Like when we had that talk the other day when we were doing that photo shoot with Jay, like you look at Branch Warren and he trains like he has special needs, but it's like like he said No, like I mean Branch has a way better physique than I do. So I I can't say anything. But like honestly he does. I mean he has one of the I think if I could have anyone's physique, he's probably in my top five cuz he's so gnarly. that I again, but that okay, but his philosophy and way of doing things for just worked for Branch. Yeah. Cuz if I trained like that, I would make it about a week and then I'd get hurt for 6 months. then it comes in the what like his gnarly nasty conditioning was because of that. What happens if all everything I ever did only worked for me? I mean they might, but I think you like when it comes down to the science like Branch said, it's like it doesn't matter how you do it, it's about putting load under a muscle and getting your targeted muscle to contract under the load. And so as long as you're doing that, no matter how you do it, as long as you're

[12:43] able to do it for years on end, Yeah. it. Which is crazy too cuz he never got hurt training like that. I mean. Like Always got hurt off of what he was doing. that that's one thing that Matt has been harping on me about when I send him my training videos every week is that I need to slow my eccentrics down and I go too fast with them. And like so if I tried to train like Branch, I mean See I think he's I think he's lying. Yeah. I think it's I might. I mean No, it's not because it works. It It works. I just that's why I'm saying like I mean the what I mean like the thing you have guys that train like Branch and you have guys that train like Nick Walker. Yeah. Like I mean they're completely different ends of the spectrum and they're two of the most muscular humans we've ever seen. Like That's why I love bodybuilding. That's why I love the art of it, the training, everything. But in my head, as we were discussing, I was like I had this like oh my god, what happens if everything I've ever done only worked for me? I still like it. It works. It works. I

[13:44] just need to do 100 studies to prove that what I do works. I mean, I've incorporated a lot of things that you've shown me and it definitely works. I know. I know. It was just funny. It was just funny. No, I think that I mean, there's no way it doesn't because of what I did for myself, but then other people that I've helped and trained with and the tips and tricks and all those things, they do work. I know they do. It's I just wish I had the time to apply more of it so that I could actually I mean, my I love what I do. I love it. But to be able to actually dive into training and actually see if the philosophies and the concepts that I've developed over the years and put it into play from a quote-unquote scientific standpoint to see if it actually makes sense from that standpoint would be a beautiful thing. One day.

[15:16] What happens if there was no internet to watch this one? What happens if there was no internet? You can around and find out for yourself. Yeah, like you'd have to figure your own out. Like that That's just kind of what dawned on me because I'm like you can watch all these different videos and and like learn things and try things quickly. Meanwhile, like I literally just watched VHS tap tapes and DVDs to get a little piece of it and just around and found out. almost like I think it's a blessing and a curse with how much information there is on the internet. Yeah. Cuz you'll go to 10 different sources and get 10 different answers.

[16:48] Good. Good. Good. Come on. Easy.

[18:25] A little bit of a person. Yeah. I know. I'm The only reason I agreed to this was because I knew it'd be fun. Yeah. But For the turtles.

[19:38] Just look at something right here. All the way there, okay? Because your arms aren't pumped from the training that you did. But know that what we're doing in today's workout, what you ate yesterday, all the stuff that you're doing is playing a role in how you look right now. That's just that mental note because what you've done with all the training that you're doing, all the nutrition that you're doing, and then how you ate yesterday, and then how you ate today, and how you trained and hydrated. Like look at the fullness in your shoulders. Like you can feel it. You're never usually this full. No, no. And like your chest is dense. Like as whenever you contract it, even though like you're not stupid lean, you can see it move. You know what I mean? You're seeing everything start to happen. So remember, because of what you've been doing and what you ate over the recent past couple days, hydrated, supplemented, and trained plays the role in why you have this look. Because as you begin to gain more muscle, like that's how you do it. You figure out what worked for a specific body part. Because your arms are your weaker body part are going to

[20:39] take more time. But now, but we're not focusing on your arms. Even though they did get better since you did this. Now imagine your arms getting just as good as this is on arm day. Yeah, I've only been doing two sets of arm or two exercises on like there's arms. Like on our back day, two biceps. But what I'm saying is like how you're the fullness and what you've achieved here is what you need to achieve on arm day. Like that feeling that like you're like You've said you're full like seven times so far today. So, that means what you've done and what you're doing is working. So, let's keep that as a mental note cuz now you're like, "This workout killed me. I feel great." How to do that for arms? And it's just figuring that out, dude. You know what I mean? Yeah. Like that feeling, that look. Cuz look, you what I'm saying is like look at the the the the shape of your arm, the fullness, the the delt came out. Like you can see that like you got the meat thick hanging on the pit there. That's what I mean. Like it's just pushing. You're pushing. Full. So, let's achieve that on other ex- on other days

[21:40] that you're training as well. Like your arm day, back day. too. Yeah, same feeling, same like, "Oh." Like cuz it's Not like, "Oh, it's arms. Let's take it easy cuz it's a little little movement. It's a little uh" How do I get the same fullness contraction like with arm day that I did with chest and shoulders? Yeah, Did it on purpose, Ty. I knew you did. You're like, "Hey, it's getting cold again. It's going to be cold again. So, that's going to want to get big and fat again." I'm going to Hey, dude. I'm I'm going to take advantage of it. He's like, "I'm going to I'm going to tempt him and say, 'Hey, let's train chest together and then you're going to want to do bodybuilding stuff with me.'" So. Oh, Just like for me, like you just had him do quarter reps on side raises. Yeah. It's like the uneducated person, they'd be like, "Oh, he just did zero reps." Yeah. But it's like after you go to failure with full range of motion and then you go to failure to half range of motion and then you continue to go to failure to 1/4 range of motion. After a while,

[22:42] you just keep getting that more and more pull on your side delts and like a lot of people don't even know what that feels like. Like quarter reps on side partials with dumbbells is insane. Well, I mean, just It it To say that anything doesn't count is why I get so worked up about all of it. It's because I'm like, "Yes, it does." Take 30-lb dumbbells and do this. Cuz watch watch what watch what happens every time he does that. This contracts. That's what I'm saying. So, it's like does is is all the way up here better? Well, sure it is. But, if we're trying to just beat it the up to a point beyond what anyone should do from any standpoint, I'm like, well, if you asked me why I have the muscle density that I do, the insertions that I do, it has to do with concepts like that. Cuz I'm like I know this will work to some degree. And for me as from done like as we're like you said like go do as many as you can. Well, if I go to failure, failure is not like if I'm doing a true all out failure set

[23:42] on depending on what exercise it is because on certain exercises you can't go like you can't do quarter reps like that because then you're risking too much injury. You know what I mean? But, it's like if I can do it comfortably to so far like on side raises, yeah, because dude, your shoulders can get beat the back. Well, if I'm doing this for another seven, eight reps, bro, I know for a fact cuz I'm feeling it. And then people are like, well, it doesn't matter about the feel. And I'm like, well, it you cuz I know it's doing something and I like what's occurring because whenever I hit certain shots, I can see all those things that I was trying to achieve during that set happen. Bodybuilder. Yes. Cool Ah, you you did this on purpose to me. I hope you enjoyed the video. It was very random. We were training chest today, so we figured we could put it on camera, so it was little different, but I'm sure Aiden's going to make it sound super cool. I don't know what you had planned in your head. You had something, but You just see what happens. That's pretty much what I've done now is just I'm just going to do Yep, I'm going to do cool and or we will not.

[24:44] Yeah. We have the one. But, uh, Ty is going to start an off season here in what, the next week or so? Yes, sir. That's the handsome dragging me in. He's going to pull me in the training again. I'm going to be I'm I haven't to be eating chili and cornbread in 6 weeks. But everybody if you want the workout check out the bio. Other than that Let her know you love her. Maybe eat a dick pill this time. Have a good time.

[27:01] Ah.
