TITLE: Tips for Building a Bigger Back | Grips, Positioning, & Leverages
VIDEO ID: eAHW_PZRTZc
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eAHW_PZRTZc
UPLOAD DATE: 2024-08-21
DURATION: 31:16
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] Good day everyone. Back for an evening workout with two guests. We have Mr. Nash Wheeler and Dean Perau in town. Nash is the winner of our It was from Black Friday last year and we were giving away uh we were picking random people to win and you were we met you up in Michigan at Fuad show the Detroit Pro, right? And then I squatted with you and squad some stuff last year too. Oh, that's right. Yeah. So brought Nash in. We're going to be doing a back session. That was his choosing of what to do. So, we are in meatthead mode. Full going to do the reveal, the whole nine. Uh, and then we're doing back tonight and then tomorrow we have a podcast. And you already did the whole damn tour, huh? Saw the new building. Yep. All the new cool Oh, yeah. Got to pick out a new Seth cut under Seth Cuts under there. Yep. Yep. See, new fresh stuff in Bob's office. We have the release coming up. Dean's ready for the fall. Yes. Just need a pumpkin latte and I'm good to go. Three days Starbucks comes out with their new menu. The kids told me. Uh, but we're going to train back

[01:01] tonight. I mean, I knew actually I just blamed the kids cuz they didn't want to seem like half a Uh, so we're going to do back tonight and Okay, get the started. I'm halfway through my pull-ups. We're all going to pick an exercise. We're all going to pick an exercise and do it. So, uh, we're starting with warm-ups with pull-ups. Uh, you can have the honor. What are we doing after that first exercise? H. Don't you dare look over there. We're going to do barbell rows and you're going to like it. I'll do any of the No, I was just looking at the I was looking at the Dy row, not something I ever got to try. Oh, yeah. Okay, we'll do that second. Cool. Yeah. All right, we'll do we're going to do barbell rows. Uh then we'll do the the DY row. Um, what do you want to do after that? We could do Yeah, I like to do some sort of underhand, whether it's pull down or

[02:03] seated row. Huh. I'm down for seated rows. Yeah. And then upper back. Yep. Yeah. Look at you. You're in it. You You pick it next. Yeah. Upper back. We'll do uh like some DB seal rows. Look at you. All right. I prefer that over that tea bar. Oh, really? Yeah. I at the at the new gym, I want to get the standing tea bar. The new gym. The new pump. I can't wait. Yeah, it's going to go. It's going to be great. 2.0. I still have I still have the sheet of all the work of all the equipment. It's in my notebook. All right. So, start. This quickly turned into what I want to do. But, uh, we're going to start. We'll do we'll keep warming up with the pull-ups and then we'll do barbell rows and we'll keep this moving. Like I would always gauge it. Like I can feel in my lower back where I am and depending on what weight. Like if I were you, I would like pick yourself up slightly. Like I mean like you'll be looking at your eyes. So whenever you're like looking at yourself in the mirror, like you could be happy and you still

[03:04] look mean as because your your your your brows are just like right there. You know what I mean? So that's how I always gauge it. Like if I just stare at myself, I'm like, "Oh, you look a whole lot meaner than you would be here. I didn't do anything. I just look." So come up a little like just from here to like here. Makes sense. Just a little bit cuz that's the only way to like kind of base it off of the you'll feel your back engage cuz right now with you dieting down and you being very connected to your body, you'll feel like the slightest difference cuz like up here like up here still works. How many people that do rows right here and have massive backs have traps and start taking over? Yeah. But again, then it comes into your like your like where your your structure, your force production, where are your the the body parts, which ones are stronger that are taking over. So me, in order to get that activation in my lats where I like it, I'm like almost like almost I'm my chest is almost parallel to the floor. You know what I mean? That but that's that's how I personally like it. And then like

[04:06] you'll see me as I get heavier start to creep up, but I'm as I'm creeping up, I'm still engaging that same part of my back and lat I want to Heat. Come on. Come on. Go. Come on.

[05:16] Heat. Heat. Heat. EVERYTHING my mind take back. So I took my mind down my mind.

[06:18] does everything he does is in a rhythm like that. So, but like you're working out with him or if I'm working out with him or he's like you can't ever compare yourself to him because he's got it's my it's it's my style. Yeah. But I mean you've been working out for so long. You're IFB pro. you fight, you know, but like in very accomplished, but I'm saying that that you when he used the word rhythm, that's the absolute perfect word because everything you do and I've seen you do almost every body part work out with you. It's like you make everything look super smooth the way you do it where where like peanut butter. Well, yeah, you're the you're the peanut butter to my jelly. Listen, so it's the controlled intensity. But what I'm saying is like for you with like you're talking about, you're super elastic. You have longer arms obviously than him, but you're still like you just have to find out what works for you and what feels good for you. You can't always just go off of you seeing somebody on the internet be like, "Fuck, I need to do it like that." That's how you get hurt because everyone's different. You may not do you're doing different way than I do it. I do it different than he's always talking about like, you know, different angles and maneuvering and looking in the mirror and trying to like do for bodybuilding people.

[07:18] This does good cuz I look cool here. I feel it this way. Like you follow people on Instagram, bro. I fell into that trap. Like you'll see someone do something, but they're doing it cuz they look a certain way when they do it for an Instagram reel. You try to do it like that, you're probably gonna her. Well, it's and and it's finding your own. It's finding yours. Like, that's what I keep saying. Just go find yours. Like, Like, look, we're all hanging out in the gym right now training and we're just knocking around ideas and feelings like and how we look or how we're watching you because you can't see your back. You feel it. We're watching it. So, if what you're feeling is what we're seeing, you got it. But sometimes what we're seeing, what you're doing, what you think you're doing, we're watching and being like, "Bro, that's not happening." And like that's where that that's where like growth comes into play of like learning about yourself. And it's like that's why I'm like just go learn with your friends, dude. Go to the gym, watch yourself, stand in the mirror and look at take videos of yourself. We didn't have videos back in the day of our just easy as a phone and a tripod. But it's like like that's the cool part about like you immediately you were like, "Man, I feel it." And he's like, "Dude, I watched it." Like it was like there it was. what you're doing

[08:19] is working. So, you felt it. You were doing it. He We watched it. He encouraged you and said, "That's exactly what the was occurring cuz we all watched and it's like I felt it. I was touching your lats and I'm having a good time. We're having a great time." That's that that's one of the the great pros of having training partner. Oh, well, without a doubt. You don't get that. You don't get that without it. No. And and he specifically like you a lot of stuff than the way you lift you've always equated to being on stage and posing. And I always remember that from literally going back five and a half years ago. I remember one of the very first shoulder exercises we did the the face pulls, right? So you see 99% of people on Instagram, right? They'll do face pulls this way. They might pull them this way. And he used to do the bend overs and pull down. That was the first it literally might have been one of the first videos we ever did. And I said I'm like, why do you do them like that? And then he went into this whole thing of how he equates a lot of exercises to being on stage hitting up a certain because it's like whatever you do you throw your arms up and then you're like

[09:20] ah well right there that's what that was all that popped in my head. I'm like oh yeah and you're like nobody's nobody's on stage doing this. No. Huh. And but I mean they if it works for you, that's great. But what happens if you watch a million people do something and you don't have a hands-on training partner or a coach explaining it? Like if Honey Ramot is next to you the whole time, you're going to figure your body out. If he's not next to you, you're going to watch a million YouTube videos and it up and be like, "Oh, I do them that way." I'm be like, "No, you're not. You're not. It doesn't matter if Dick's doing them that way. You have to do them this way for you. You got to try a bunch of different variations. And it's like, but that's again, that's the fun in the gym. That's the thing that pisses me off so much about everybody saying this way is this the best way. It's like, no, no, no. You can I don't train back the same way I train legs, the same way I train chest, the same way I train arms. It's about that art and the fun and and then having fun with your buddies. It's cool to get big. It's cool to get jacked together. It's cool to do weight drips in the morning together.

[10:23] For me, I'm still thinking strong lat on this. So, the first engagement is lower lat. Like you get behind on Dean straight behind. You can see like whenever it stretches and the engagement. So, that way I'm thinking the whole time I'm thinking pulling back, strong, thick lats. Um, this actually is not a bad idea for a first exercise. Um, I was just wanting to with Nash. But, uh, this isn't a bad idea for a first, uh, exercise simply because it's a great way to push blood into your lats and specifically target them. Uh, and you can start going heavier on here, you know, but love this piece of equipment. I don't mind it being a selector sized uh uh, stack either. Man, this is not a bad tune list you got going on here. Yeah, this definitely isn't Cory's. Definitely isn't Cory's. And he's the one from the era. I mean, this is from the same era. I ain't from that era. But you ain't from that era.

[11:25] It's not gay. This is the only way you're going to understand. Yeah. No, I got you. Feel my back as I'm doing it here. Here and lower. Okay. So that as I'm doing it, like you'll just be able to feel the engagement happen and when, where, how. Like I'll do a few reps. I'll just keep doing reps. Put your hands here. Put your hands here. Put your hands there. That way you can feel everything occurring as you're doing it. These tents up first. Oh yeah. So that's that like whenever you're thinking about doing a back lat. So whenever we squeeze back you're right there. Now put your hands flat on my back. Up down lower though. Like right in there. So like even if it's just one side so you can feel what happens. Right. Almost like you're pulling inwards. Yes. Are you trying to do anything here? No, cuz I'm thinking lats. All this. Yeah. So, it's almost like you're like working your way through here. Yeah. So, it's like think of a lat spread. How whenever you throw that

[12:26] thing out, you know what I mean? This initial like Yeah. It It's also uh Seth, right? It's also I mean, you're just also driving your elbows back. Yeah. I mean, I'm saying a Q for him would also be just driving them back and almost that arch in the back in a So like that blow like that whole like that whole lat right there that that lower lat that that you see guys piece out and you're just like man how's it that's all I'm thinking about but that thick meat right there like Dorian Yates that's why they call this a Dy row. Okay. You're and elbows tucked. Your elbows go out. No. Go. You're It's shoulder and chit. Yeah. Pointless. You And then you're Yeah, cuz that's a completely different exercise. Like that's what I was telling

[13:26] him when I did back in here last week. I went seat lower, hands high, but then it turns into like a rear del romboid trap it's great. Yeah. Yeah. And you Sorry. Sorry. Do you keep your lower left flexed the entire time? I keep this flexed. You You can You might have to because like we were just talking about you being Mr. Elasticity. Like me, I can stretch. My chest is pinned. Chest is pinned and I'm like, "Right." And I can feel it. You might have to be like because if I flex my lower lats right now, I feel them engaged. And then when I go like this and row through, I can feel everything go up. Yeah. Okay. Good.

[14:42] And also a when you're doing this and how we're doing it from the underhand grip, if you go grip it from the side, you'll feel it. You'll and pull with your pinkies down low. And if you go from here, because I when I'm doing back, I rarely pull with my index finger. I just don't. That's that whole holding pistols in your hand thing that I talked about years ago. I'll pull right here, and you'll even you'll feel it there. But then I'll also I'll feel all the way up into uh into my uh uh into my tries. Okay. So, I'll start to feel it all the way up into there when I'm pulling from that area. Completely different movement. And I mean all we're doing is going from here, same seat position, same everything to here. Now, would you treat that like uh how you do like the lat pull downs? How you'll go like you say like two here, two here? Would you do like two different variations in the You can but all for for for for me? No. No, I won't. I'll I'll just go do something else cuz I mean I like them

[15:42] but they're not a top priority is whenever I do this neutral grip here. But I'm just saying for you learning in this point and in your in your programming because your suit starting to connect with your body a little bit better than you've ever before. So you'll be able to grab a hold of there and feel it. Be like, "Oh, I'm going to try a couple here." And you'll be like, "Oh yeah, look, it's all the way into my terries and my romboids and starting to creep up into my upper back." You know what I mean? So it's like you'll just feel the difference cuz you can manipulate any exercise that you're doing by where you're pulling from as well. Like if I start pulling from my from my index finger and middle finger, it's going to be diff. It's going to feel for me, it's going to feel different than if I pull with my pinky and ring finger. Yeah. Just because of your engagement. Like, dude, if you're pulling with your index finger and your middle finger, you watch, you're going to pull more with your biceps and start to engage your upper back much more. You start pulling with your ring finger and your pinky and then keeping your elbows tucked, you're going to start pulling way more with your lats. Just like very elementary, intermediate style like concepts right there. And it starts making a big difference in your training. And you start to learn your Yeah. Grip. Grip can

[16:44] change a whole lot cuz me I never understood. People are like, "Pull with your elbow." And I'm like, "I I'm not. I'm pulling with my hand though." Yeah. And it never made sense to me. But like Dean was like, "Pull with your elbows." I remember hearing that from people. I'm like, "What? How do I do that?" Cuz I was always pulling with my hands. So that's where it came from me like pulling with fingers and and like cuz if I pull with my pinkies, I noticed that I immediately started pulling with my elbows. Well, I think but I didn't understand it at that time of like, oh, that's what they meant. The first time you're like, what's the And I was I was a good and I still didn't get it. And then you like years ago when you talked about the pistol grip thing, that's a huge component too, I think, for people because a lot of people too, they they're gripping the bar so tight and they're doing whatever. I and I think the looser and same with the pistol grip. It's like use that just like hook grip. It's kind of the same difference. You're doing the same thing. And I think that's a huge key too for people. Oh, for sure. because it's and again that's why I'm I'm going to say it a

[17:45] million more times spending time in the gym and just trying a bunch of different with different grips and different feelings because dude we just explained all this dude you could get some of the best the you could get some of the best trainers in here talking and it might talk over too many people's heads that want to just get started with trying something you I mean being an ear a very uh beginner or intermediate uh level lifter you could You could have some very advanced coach and and they're saying do this, do this. So they start doing they're like it's not working. It's like you don't understand. You you're not connecting with your body yet. And that's why I'm saying spend time grip it this way. Try this. Feel it. And just pay attention. And again, like we said, have partners watch and be like, "Oh, there it is." Feel your back. Be like, "Feel this." As you're doing it, be like, "Oh my god, there it is. There's that. There's the the lower lats starting to engage and fire right away." When he was like, "Dude, I can feel your lats through your shirt." It just triggered like Okay. So, what I just did is is semi correct or it's going at Yeah. Like like me, you were bent over and me standing over you. He's directly

[18:47] behind you. Me standing over you looking at you. I mean, in front of me once I was we were about to just slap hands through the Eiffel Tower. It was amazing. I know. Like, and so obviously if you had a tank top on or like a stringer, you you'd be able to see someone's lats moving easier. You have a, you know, big oversized black shirt on and I could still see your lats, like I said, completely stretched. And then when you were rowing up, I could see the engagement, the contraction of your lat. So I could see that working. That's when you're like, "Can you see it?" I'm like, "Yeah, I can see it." Like you you were like shocked when I saw it. You're up, pasty. He's like, "I have to wear jeans and a t-shirt all day, every day." Literally. That's me in the winter time, dude. This is like the This is the most tan I've ever been in my life. Come on. Oh, what they say? There was some meme that I saw about uh 69 and with your girl. Have you noticed that? Have you ever thought about how if

[19:48] your girl sucking your dick and you're eating her ass, you're using her body as a straw to suck your own dick? I was like, how up is that? Like, what am I following? Oh god. starts creeping up in your floor. You're going Yeah, dude. You start I'm going in the wrong direction, dude. I am engaging with these posts. You're like, how do I GET BACK? STOP liking the up How do I get back to How do I get back to just boobs on my face? I'm come I'm over here the human draw. I cannot take this anymore. Saying everything I said before. All these words, they make no sense. I found less and ignorance. Less I hear, the less you say. You'll

[20:48] find that out anywhere. Just like everything you see. One step closer to the end. And I'm about to fight. I need a little answers so clear. Wish I could find a way to disappear. All these thoughts, they make no sense. I found this ignorance. Nothing seems to go away over and over again. Just like before. Everything you say to the right. I need something.

[21:59] Shut up. Shut up. Shut up. SHUT UP. I'M ABOUT TO RIDE EVERYTHING you say to me. And I'm about to break. I need a little room to break. I'm about to break everything you say to me. And I'm about to break. I need a little room to break. break. What about here? Are you lower or upper? So, I want you to do three reps to your below your navl so you can feel it.

[23:00] What's a navl? Your belly button right here though? Yeah. Right below to your waist. Pull right below your belly button. Not into your waist, but right below your belly button. Do three reps. Now I want you to do three between your sternum. There you go. And your navl. Same exercise feels different, don't it? Oh yeah. I mean, this is more upper. Yeah. It's like mid. Same exercise. Change the position of where you're pulling and the positioning of your chest and your elbow. Elbows. The further you go up, the more naturally your elbows are going to come out. The further you go down, the more naturally your elbows will go in. So me, if I'm trying to hit midback, I go between my sternum and my navl,

[24:01] which is right here. And then I won't kick my elbows completely out, but it'll be like in mid with in line with the bar itself. So I won't pull down because we just did a ton of lower lat. So I like mid because we're going to we're going to do it upper back after this. So I won't I'm not trying to hit upper back. So I want to hit midback where I'm kind of able to manipulate my hands and all the movements. The feet squeezing right there, right here in this area. You know what I mean? Obviously, we're going to hit other parts, but I really want to be able to feel hit the midback and like squeeze that Can you drop that open? Oh, you were light. I was trying to feel it. Yeah, you'll feel it much better now. Okay. Between your belly butt and your sternum. Yes. Right here. That shit's happening.

[25:02] Good. It helps when like there's hands there. Feel it. Yeah. Cuz I'm like you're like this here like almost like guiding my mind to like close that hole. My reflection is no connection to your lover. Good. Come on.

[26:02] Let them hang cuz I did it. No, I did it myself. You're good. I FOCUSED ON KICKING ASS. THAT'S what I was doing. Here we go. And cleanliness is godliness and God is empty just like me. It's not okay with the madness on your sadness to the jungle. I never let

[27:06] you go. Oh, nice. Yeah. She's my only

[28:22] 1 2 3 I came into this world as a reject. Look into these eyes and you'll see the size of the flag pulling on a fast every day. She like she This is This year your fit is designed specifically by Nick for me. Yeah. Big orange guy. Camo camo shorts with a orange shirt and a red and black hat. Yes. Probably some probably some boots though. Not some Jordan Lowe's. Yeah. I mean I Yeah, that's you. But yeah, it's a good look though. Yeah. You go kill you go kill a turkey. Go nail Tracy. You can You got it all. It's a really versatile. Then you can go courtside. Yeah. And I can go courtside. Very versatile fit.

[29:22] Yeah. Me choosing the plush sweatpants was a bad idea. I'm sweating my ass off. Sweating your ass off. back day with the winner, Nash Wheeler. It was a good time. It was. Yeah. Truck driver Nash from Michigan. Uh pasty white. He can't wear he he has to wear a t-shirt and jeans every day. Huh? I'm allowed to wear shorts, but it's usually jeans. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This is me in the winter time. You guys know this. This now I'm all tan and It's nice. Now I'm like, "Hey, look, dickhead." You look you look super tan. It doesn't doesn't take much. No. But Nash, uh Nash, how long I mean we're going to do a podcast tomorrow, but I mean you've been following along uh the company following the companies and supporting us for how long? Four years. Four years now. appreciate it. It's awesome. Uh we did so every now and then you guys know we do different types of uh uh raffles and giveaways and everything and from last Black Friday we just randomly chose two people and it was we finally got you in even though

[30:23] it's August and you won in 2023. So, but no, we're excited. Uh you got the tour today. John and Dean took you on the tour. Yep. Yeah. Pretty cool. Did you see the new building? Yeah. Sick. It It's massive compared to this. It's awesome. Super cool. We're excited about it. But, uh, no, I'm excited. We got another couple days here. Um, yeah. I don't know what else. Good day. Yeah, we can close it up now, I guess. Yeah. Okay. Buy s'mores. Yeah. Yeah. Buy s'mores and warm it up. Give her a good slap on the ass and let her know you love her. The cookie. The cookie. So you can take that cookie.
