TITLE: TOP 5 ARM EXERCISES | WHITEBOARD WORKOUT
VIDEO ID: EaKmRFql3Ek
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EaKmRFql3Ek
UPLOAD DATE: 2025-06-26
DURATION: 45:24
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] If your arms suck, you should do an arm day. If you're trying to figure out why your arms aren't growing, you should do an arm day. If you are doing an arm day, you're not doing it hard enough, right? up or lower. Jesus, Ty, we were being we were being motivational. My mom was at my apartment last weekend. She's like, "Why are your hands always ripped?" I was like, "I don't Well, maybe it's a little bit of the growth and, you know, just growing." Dude, you do have Jay Cutler growth hands. Look at that. Give me your hand. It's bad, dude. It is bad. Look at this, dude. Look at this. This That's a That's a Jay Cup palm there. I remember shaking his hand and now I know cuz he used to shake my hand years ago and I'm like, man, he's not got strong grip. And I'm like, probably because of That's the thing, dude. Like, I went to carry a 45 pound bumper plate across the gym last night. I was like, "My hands are shitty, dude." Good times. All right, everybody. Welcome to a whiteboard workout with the notebook guy, Ty. This video is brought

[01:00] to you by Action Sledge supplements, deadlifts and gummy bears. Now available in intake and hydraulic, too. Make sure you use code Aiden and Code Tai. These two youngans work their balls off for us. And I want to make sure that they get all the support and love from you guys. They benefit. And Aiden's the one that does a whole bunch of really cool for you guys on YouTube. All the playlists, all the cool videos. So support him. And of course, Young Tai code notebook. Code notebook for everything. Code tie won't work. Code tie. No. Code notebook. Did I say code tie? God damn it. Don't do Um, you're like, "You're giving me the plug. Do the right one." So, we are here for a whiteboard workout today. Arm day. And actually, I think this is a little bit of a touchy subject within the bodybuilding world. They don't have arm days. But you I have an arm day. You have an arm day. It's like laughs of the Moheakans. I'm like last of the arm day, guys. Um, you have a unique training split as well. Yeah, I do. Um, but I personally believe in an arm day simply because we are bodybuilders. I think

[02:01] that you actually have to prioritize this body part. Um, in my opinion, but if I mean, if you don't like training arms, I don't know what's wrong. I don't know. That's what I people like arms are arm training is boring. Like, how the do you think that? It is the greatest day in the week. Exactly. And I treat it just like I do anything else. And you train it intensely. It's supposed to be fun. It's the one day you just get yacked out of your mind and look super cool in the gym and be like, "Fuck yeah, super pumped." Um, but we are going to go through our top five arm exercises. Five biceps, five triceps, each one of us, which one we think is the best. Um, which is going to be super difficult depending on like the time period of what your training style is, whether you're prepping or whether you're in a bulk phase. But we're going to go through it. So, get ready. It's going to be a hell of a day. Not a lot of people have an arm day in their in their in their uh split. I disagree with it. I think it's super important. You were somebody that your arms need a lot of work. They are a body part that needed the most work and over the past year I mean I think your arms

[03:01] probably grown like three to four inches, I'd say. So yeah. So it's like do you think that the way you prioritized your arm training like is the reason that they grew so much? Absolutely. Yeah. that like it's that simple. Like it's the rich Piana. Like the more you do, the more you're like the more you put into something, the more you're going to get out. So, I mean, I personally think the exact same. But I thought it was unique because whenever we first started talking about your split and what you needed to do, I was like, "Hey, dude, you're 5'9", 5 foot 10. Like, you're a huge framed guy. If longer limbs with longer limbs, if you don't have massive arms, you're going to look stringy on stage, especially in comparison to your legs. So, it's like as you're building your physique, I was one of the few people that were like, "Hey, dude, your arms suck." And now over the past year, I'm like, "Dude, your arms I love I love to see it." And you continually critique yourself cuz uh we can put up side by side pictures for him. Um but you continually critique yourself and we were just talking about your side by or your side chest shot and how your bicep you're like, I need to continue to keep filling this in. So,

[04:03] constantly critiquing yourself is important, but um I want to go through I have my top five bicep exercises in my head. I do not know what you have. I'm curious if they match up because you still have a little bit of a new age nuance on your training styles. I've dug into you a little bit and put some old school in you, but uh I'm super excited. So, you should we go back and forth one to one? You think so? All right. I don't know if I should put this as my number one bicep exercise. I have a clear winner for me. You have a clear winner for me. It works for me. Works for you. Yes. And that's the biggest difference for everybody is like what works for you best. I'm not doing an arm workout without doing these. Even if one said I do them, I can't help myself. I have to do them. Alternating dumbbell curls are an OG forever exercise. I just have to do

[05:03] them. That's in there. I don't know if I I don't know if I can put it number one as my most effective, but it's an OG. Yeah, I'll put it there. it. So, I'm going to go with a single arm cable preacher. No, mine's way better for you. It might be. There was I just got done saying the new age nuance and you're like number one single arm cable preacher. Yep. Yeah, if you were to say I could only do five bicep exercises, like these are the Yeah, let's say that five bicep exercises you're only allowed to do. Preacher curls are in there. I don't know about a single arm cable, but yeah, not bad. Okay. All right. This is going to piss a lot of people today off. Dumbbell hammer curls. This is the exercise that built the thickness of my biceps. This there is a ton of different ways to do them. We'll go and explain it in this workout, but once I started the doing these in a specific way, I watched Phil Heath do them. That's whenever

[06:05] that's whenever I truly started to develop much thicker biceps. Dumbbell hammer curls. Yeah. This is why we're buddies. This is I have to get the dumbbell hammer as well. This is why we're friends. We agree on something. I like it. I think this is a a terrific exercise. There's so many different ways to do them. Straight up, straight forward like this. You can cross the body. Great for overall thickness of the bicep. this exercise. I This is my number one most hated exercise for every single body part. I hate doing them. Once I started doing these, this these two doing them a specific way is how my arms truly began to grow and and get to the next level. So, I hate these with a passion. Hate them. I do that every arm workout. Yeah, I hate them. Hate them. But guess what? They work. It

[07:06] works. Yeah. I like Yeah. See, I have to agree with you on that as well. Yeah. Again, rubbing off on you a little bit. A little bit. Rubbing off on you a little bit. two-handed cable curls. I think this uh I would prefer this over a straight bar curl or a camber bar curl. I love the constant tension with the cable curl. I love that you can do it at different uh heights, whether it's up a little higher or down all the way to the bottom. You're able to just get you can step back with it and get a whole different pull or step closer and get a different squeeze a different pull and a different squeeze on it. From a two-handed exercise standpoint, two-handed cable curls. Ah, nice. I like it. They're in there for sure. They're in there. All right. A little bit different. Little bit I love preacher curls. Specifically, the plate loaded machine. Uh, preacher curl. I love it. I love it because you

[08:08] can get a great isolation squeeze with some lighter weight, but then you can also get yacked out and just load that up and get six to eight reps with it. Oh man. I didn't see that one coming. I That came out of left field. I It's the only two-handed bicep exercise I do. We got to change that. I It's got to turn into two hands. If I do two hands, one take the left one takes over every time. Really? Yeah. That's why I Is the left one stronger? Mhm. Yeah, but your dominant right. Mhm. I have that problem, too. My left arm is way stronger than my right arm, but I'm right-handed. I think there's like some science behind that, but we're not going to talk about the science stuff. I think out of this, out of my list here, you could do these in many different variations with different intensifiers, uh, methodologies. These five are all I would need to build a great set of arms. This is pretty much all I did to build a great set of arms. Ty's ready. Moving on to triceps. I love so many tricep exercises. I noticed that

[09:10] as I was thinking of these in my head, I am very long head dominant in my favorite tricep exercises. I have over the past couple months that's I'd say 75% of my training has been long head focus. Yeah. Rubbing off on them. Rubbing off on them. It's in there. Whenever you're going up to hit a front double bicep, having a hanging long head on a front double bicep is nuts. Whenever you see someone with a great uh long head development, you're just like, "Dude, your arms look twice as big." Like, that's always something I focused on when I was younger. I was like, "How do I just get this giant tricep whenever I hang like at this at this 90° angle? I just want this to look like it's like a bubble that comes down from there." So, I did every single exercise that was in the Arnold Encyclopedia of Bodybuilding that said it was long head dominant. And that's what I did. So, I have one clear winner that is my all-time favorite tricep exercise. It's a little rough. I already know what it's

[10:10] going to be. I think it I it is the one exercise that changed my tricep uh training and helped me connect and also develop that that just this big slab of meat that looks like a like a I equated in my head like a uh like a New York no a New York strip steak like just that piece right here just right there looks like a big thick steak. I don't know. It's pretty ridiculous. That's what's in my head. off. dumbbell press or a French press. A single dumbbell over your head, heavier just to press up. You got to have a little bit of shoulder mobility. You're probably going to whack yourself in the back of the head with the dumbbell and it's a little rough on on the elbows. However, my favorite tricep exercise hands down. I have to agree. man. Hey, I think your arms are growing because of me. Yeah, I say so. No,

[11:12] it. That's not true. You're doing the work, but the experimenting is everything cuz I mean, you've you've probably done you've probably done done 10 different arm workouts in the past year to figure out what works for you and and then you're still figuring out what works for you and at what capacity because when you're training, that is the most important thing to do. the hi all the all the stuff we're doing here if this is all fun but these are my favorite and they all have been put into workouts in a different place and I have a hierarchy of exercises in my head that have worked I have done over the past 27 years I have done so many different types of exercises so many different types of workouts so many different intensifiers and for me I didn't myself and was like oh I really don't like this exercise but and it doesn't work no I hate this exercise, but I know it works for me. It's up there in one of those as an exercise that I have to prioritize to make sure my arms grow as a professional bodybuilder. I had decent arms. And as I

[12:13] was continuing, I was like, well, I got this far by doing things that I just like to do. Now, I have to start doing some things that I don't like to do to get to the next level. Start testing out the different styles of training. Start testing the waters of everything to see how it's going to affect me. That's why I'm so confident in my list for myself personally. You have to build yours and that's why we're here to help maybe add some uh spice to your workouts and also some different perspectives. Skull crushers cambered bar Yep. With the burnout of the closed grip bench. If you do skull crushers, you have to do the skull crushers and then the burnout. It's mandatory. You can't do that. What do you mean? You can't say any. Well, I mean, it can You can't say any. It can be with a rope. It can be with an easy bar. It can be with a V bar. Just like N overhead. You got

[13:13] to pick one. Got to pick one. Change that Not any. Okay. Which one do you like the best? I pissed him off. Yeah, you did. M probably going to Ah, nice. I like it. I like it. I like Yeah. Again, over the head. Over the head is a little it's it it is it's a little sketchy cuz even you getting bigger like this, your mobility changes like by the week. If you're a little tight from doing chest or tight from doing shoulders or lats are a little sore and you go to do something overhead, it's going to affect how you how you do it. That exercise is nasty. It's a ruthless exercise. You there's a little bit you can kind of with it and do it in different variations. However, I believe that overall I mean it was built for overall strength, but then I started doing it when I saw a variation of

[14:15] branch. I watched him kind of do it. Yes. like that. Branch was doing them like he was doing it. I found out that if you do like a close grip bench rather than do a close grip bench, uh I started doing close grip bench higher and higher. And then that's whenever I found someone saying, "Oh, you're doing JM presses." I was like, "What the is a JM press?" And then I looked it up and it was like a variation where I was bringing the close grip bench down to my teeth right here. So, it was a little dangerous with like 225 and then you just press up and I'm like, "Holy is that mashing my triceps and then I looked it up and I was like, really cool exercise." I kind of thought I was like like groundbreaking when I started doing close grip bench to my teeth. No, somebody else already did it. That cat great overall mass development exercise. Yes. Genius exercise, man. I know I'm boring, man. you like them too. All long head focused. All long head focused exercises. Obviously, whenever you do

[15:16] any type of tricep exercise, it's going to hit your entire tricep. However, there's always a little bit more of a focus, and that's why I'm super particular on variations and hand placement, which we'll get into in the workout. Vbar pressed outs. It's a staple in all my in all my workouts. I pre prefer it from the high cable right there. get over top of it and press press. Am I right in saying that? Is this a press and this a push? I consider this like an extension or push down and this would be a press. Okay, cool. I'm just making sure I got the right term methodology for today's day and age. But I always said that this was a press down. I'll get right over top of it. Uh and there's a like I'll either put if I'm doing super heavy, I'll switch my head to one side of it. Mhm. And then whatever number I do this way, I switch my head to the other side and do that way. Can't get unbalanced, which I kind of rigged something up. I mean, you saw it the other day where I

[16:17] put the straight bar on the dip machine. I You It's the It's the same principle as that movement. You left it You left it there the other day and I loved it. I started doing it. It was sick. I Yeah, it is a very similar concept there. This one's just always been in my workouts, but I do love the dip machine. I think that uh I like it a lot just on that one in particular because you can change the hand placement. You know, you could do a little bit of a reverse grip and start really getting that lateral head and then that medial head by doing a little bit of a reverse grip. Um yeah, it's the only isolation exercise I'll put. I do love rope press downs as well. However, a single arm press down paired with any of these, you will be able to get a killer workout. Last one, Ty. Great choice. Can't go wrong with it. Can't go wrong with it. I like it. This looks like my arm workout every time. Yeah, for real. I think with all arm exercises, uh, with

[17:18] all exercises to some degree, there's so many things that play a role that today gets lost in the nuance of the You need to be able to be intense with the workouts, but also like hand placement plays a huge role. We're talking about just doing preacher curls, but if you're doing two-handed preacher curls, are your hands close together? Are they a little bit wider apart? Are they wider than your shoulders or are they right in line with your shoulders? What's the path? You know, is it closer together? what are we working? And with arms, if you're in decent shape, like you'll be able to see them, how they're working when they're doing it. That's why I've always been such a firm believer in making sure you're wearing like a cut off or something so that you can see your arms in a workout because that's part of being a bodybuilder. You should be me taking my shirt off in the gym and being in a cut off or a tank top wasn't for everyone else in the gym. It was for me to be excited about what I'm building. Whenever I'm doing front raises, whenever I'm doing curls, you'd see me in the gym. I'll turn to the side and be like, "Yeah." Am I being egotistical like, "Fuck yeah. Look how good I look." No. The whole time I'm

[18:20] working out, I'm watching myself going, "All right, this is doing a good job. I like it. I like it. Maybe if I tried this, how's it going to affect it? If I come out a little bit more, is it going to What's the effect going to be whenever I'm starting to get a little English at body English added into my older name dumbbell curls? Is it a good idea? Whenever I'm doing cable curls, arm my arms the same as if I was doing regular cambered bar curls or easy bar curls with with free weights versus a cable. Like that's all I was doing was analyzing the whole time. And it's exciting. I mean, we could have done a study and said my arms grew by 50% when I started wearing a cut off for arm day. That's true. Ty, first, one of my favorite exercises is preacher curls. Now, I like them because you get to do them in two different variations. From an isolation exercise, like an isolation standpoint, good squeeze, nice long stretch, good squeeze. However, whenever I was in your position, maybe eating a few too many anadraws, eating 4,000 calories a day, I found out putting it

[19:21] as like kind of a mass building concept, pushing a ton of blood into the bicep, all the food, all the gear, all the juice, all the love into it using some heavier weight on a preacher curl. Now, with this, it's not going to be that perfect form of like Yes. It's almost like a little bit more of a rhythm like I did on my side on my side laterals. Um, and I used to, I don't think I will anymore, work up to like 325s on here. So the goal, my arms really started exploding whenever I was doing these type of heavier preacher curls, heavy dumbbell curls, and my most hated exercise, the the incline alternating dumbbell curls. And then we're going to do V-bar press downs with it. Then you can choose

[20:22] So, this exercise, there's a few exercises, like I was saying earlier, um, that helped really like the next level of my arms. This exercise in particular with a little bit heavier weight in that rhythm that we're going to get into here in that six to eight rep range. I always kept higher volume with my arms, but I never really dipped under that 10 10 to 12 rep range. Once I did that with these and incline dumbbell curls is really whenever my arms started to change. Like the heavy hammer curls in that 6 to 10 rep range, like Phil Heath would do them. And when Phil I watched a video of Phil Heath just do like four or five on this arm and then four or five on this arm and he never broke that 90° never. He never came up and I was like what the is he doing? Why wouldn't he? And then I started doing them that way just cuz I saw it. I'm like man my arms really started to shape fill out and shape. And I noticed that from these incline dumbbell curls and those. So we're work going to work up to the top sets in that six to nine rep range.

[21:26] Just like a new chill. I am a lover hater. I am an instigator. You are an oversight. Don't try to compromise. I learn to love to hat it. I am not into it. Just call my name. Don't be okay. No heat. Yeah. Heat.

[22:27] I knew it all. You said I'm trying to play me just like know you want the Come on. Heat. Yeah. One more. This time stay over top of it.

[23:29] There you go. Big stretch all the way down. Up 9. Good. Two more. You're going to hate it. Oh my god. All right, you're up. I'm up. What are we

[24:31] doing? Do some incline curls. Your favorite. All right, so question. There's a bunch of different ways to do incline curls. You can do them, you know, alternating. You could do them both at the same time. You can do them at this angle here. You could do them at 45. Do you see laying down and doing them here? Don't do that. I I don't I agree. But where where do you personally like it? I usually hang out here. Sometimes I'll go click down. Yeah. But I notice that the click down more at that at like right above 45° is where I mean I think that's that's at about 45 degrees there, right? Yeah. A little higher. I was going to say that's slightly higher. That's probably 45 right there. Yeah, that's 45. I'd go one click above the 45. I do like this position though. Whenever I go a little heavier, I would go one click up. Like heavy on incline curls, dude. If you were doing 45, 50 lb

[25:33] dumbbells on incline curls, you strong Now, with this, the most important thing is controlling the weight. Don't get out of control on here because of that hanging weight in the position that you're in with your bicep, with your with your shoulder. Like, there's a lot of things that can go wrong if you start trying to horse the weights too much here. You can use a little bit, but the position of your body being up against this kind of restricts you from doing any of the horsecocking, but trust me, you'll find a way to something up. But being in that position and focusing on a good squeeze, a good stretch, and pushing blood and developing that arm. Like the whole time I was doing these, doing this exercise, all I thought about was round bicep. Full round bicep. That's all that was in my head as I'm doing them. And like you can't go too heavy cuz I can already feel like I don't do these often anymore. I can already feel it pulling Yeah. Yeah, on my front delt.

[26:35] Be careful. So, for triceps, it's just going to be like a bilateral uh dumbbell skull crusher on an incline bench. And I kind of position myself up higher so my back can hang off of the bench a little bit. So, that way I'm really able to get a good stretch in my triceps. And I'm just coming straight up. Torching the long head. The long head. You see a lot of powerlifterss do these from the floor. Yeah, they do them they like do them they do them with like a real fast rhythm. They like roll into them really roll into them a lot. I mean I think it's cool as Looks really cool cuz they're doing like the 85s. They get heavy with them. Uh the reason that I don't do these very often is because of my weak right tricep because of the uh the tear. It just never healed 100%. I'd probably say this arm is at like 75 to 80% of what it was from a tricep perspective. still being an educational and I also believe

[27:37] that where you place your hands and grip these dumbbells in how you're hitting your bicep if you're being super particular. If you grab the dumbbells up high whenever you're doing these and you go into a curl, it's going to feel different than if you grab all the way to the back and curl up. It's just the positioning of the weight in your hand. It's going to play a role. So, the only way to find out is to position your hand differently. Whether it's all the way up, all the way back, or right dead nut center. It's up to you. You experiment with it and see how it works. Because whenever you have it all the way up and you curl in, you're going to feel it different than if you would back here. That's kind of the the bro science part of all of this is the experimentation for you with all of it. I personally like all the way back

[28:51] You know how I can tell I never do these? I'm shaking like crazy. It's time to make a mess for all of the fun. The damage is done. I feel the I I I don't know. I've I've never been more excited to see another man strip down in real life than right now. Same story. It's not true. Twins. Twins. Just slightly smaller. Me? You? Me? Me? No, it's uh I will say that it's it's I mean, dude. You've gotten so much bigger since what? Last year when we were doing the race to 240. Now it's the race to 260 for you. Yeah. 265. How much do you weigh right now? 255. 255. Yeah. Yeah. So, I mean, it's just it's young muscle developing and it's super exciting for it, dude. It's it's because of where you are within your programming. It's where you are within everything. me. I'm 40 years old

[29:53] having trouble doing the 25s on bilateral whatever the you call these things to the point of disease. Now I want release from all this decay. Take it away. Nobody cares. I like I just like the pull. I can feel I can feel the the bicep just streaming on the way down. And whenever you're here, it's just again dragging it up. I like it. Heat.

[31:06] Heat. out. Come on. Come on. Another one. Let's go. Let's There you go. Hey, you got me bears over there. Yeah. Okay. I was going to tell him it's very difficult to criticize anything he's doing right now because how far the de what he's got going on right now and how he's developing is I mean you're make he's making progress at at at great stride. So I don't get to say much other than just keep doing a good job. I want to have an input and tell them what to do but I I can't.

[32:22] This is what they tell me. Dumbbell hammer curls and we're going to do the dip machine press down. We're going to put the bar in there. Like Ty was saying earlier, um there is a ton of different ways to do all of these different exercises. I keep saying it over and over. The different variations, body placement, the arm path, positioning of everything. Everything plays a role whenever you're doing these exercises. Why? Because they are little crumbs that add up into a pile. I can't stress that enough. With everything that you do in the gym, in life, all those little crumbs, all the little details turn into a pile at some point. So why not pay attention to them the entire time you're doing everything? And it doesn't mean that it has to be like, "Oh, this makes a massive difference in something." No, but it can make a little bit of a difference. And over time, that compounds like the hand placement whenever you're doing these. So where you place your hand in here, if you're doing hammer curls, love hammer curls. All I have to do is hold the dumb hold

[33:22] my hands on the back side of the dumbbells and do a hammer curl and see how it feels versus it being here. It's the same exercise. It's going to feel slightly different. Now, does it make that much of a difference? Maybe, maybe not. But why not pay attention to that detail so that you can make it so that you can recognize which one you should be doing and how much of a difference it does make. And then also, like Tai was just doing on the incline uh curls, let's do one, two, three on the left side. One, two, three on the right side. Or you could just go one, two, one, two. How you do all that does play a role. Again, it's the crumbs. It's the details that make a difference. Now, what also makes a difference? Hammer crows across the body. You'll feel a little bit more in the brachialis when you do it across the body. How far you come up plays a role. All you have to do

[34:24] is watch in the mirror and you see it all happening. And then you make the decision on how the you want to do them to make the progress that you want to. And during this, you cannot sit here and lie to yourself about how something is working or not. It's all right there. Or you could just do a whole bunch of different and see what works and do that. 90° is where I like to hang out. That's where I noticed the most effect the most the most progress whenever I started to notice was I just placed an emphasis on filling up that bicep. That thickness is all I was focusing on as I was standing here just and every now and then I'd come across the body and squeeze all the way up and I'd start to see the brachiialis in the form really start to fire. It'd fill up with blood. So, but the majority of the time I stuck right here. I would do three to five on this arm, three to five on this arm. And the whole time I'm focusing on the

[35:25] thickness of the bicep. Okay? The whole goal. Okay? If I'm right here, all I wanted to do was you be able to see the thickness of my bicep from right there. And you can you can still see it. That was all I was focusing on. That was my concept. That was everything that was going through my head. And also having a thick bicep also plays a role in the side tricep because as it's pressed up against your body, it'll able to give it that threedimensionality of your arm. At least in my head. I want to tell very similar to the press down to the B

[36:26] bar press down, but I think you're right. I like these better. It's a little less strenuous on the elbows and a little more tension on the triceps. I just think you don't have to worry about like trying to balance yourself with a cable. Like the cable starts pouring on you. That way you can just get over top of it, press down. Yeah. And you're able to get like a much smoother press. Yeah. Like I can I can kind I can get more over top of it and bring it to like right right into my solar plexus, my sternum and the only one. So I'm filthy.

[37:26] Oh, in my own misery. Oh my god. Yes.

[38:28] The only one They was working. You can see him. It's crazy how much of a difference that makes in like the grab bottom half. Grabbing on the bottom half of it. Yeah. I mean, I can even see it on me just like how my biceps go up and where the blood is. How it started stretching right there. I can see it. Yeah. Like it's obvious. hammer curls. How the do people say these are stupid? I don't know. pencil. pencil necks when you're that big of a That's what happens when you do high rocks. And it does happen, huh? You fire. I thought it was funny on Instagram. I He made that post over the weekend. I said, "Tess Austro getting lower by the day." You can see it. And people were Well, not even that you could see it, but somebody commented. They're like, "What do you think's causing that?" I'm like, "Bro, like, bro, I'm being an cuz he's doing

[39:29] hybrid Cuz he's I'm done. I'm done taking thousand migs of test a week. We'll do we'll do two sets there and then two sets two sets a different way. Okay. I want to see what you look like when you do them. I just want to see how your bicep I want to see the whole nine whenever you're from behind like this. Mhm. And then also like a concentration curl. Like an actual concentration curl that you would hold. I want to see what you look like. What do you think of reverse grip singles? That's what I do. Is that what you do? I prefer them. Uh, but I hate them because I am much much weaker and need to use like 15 pounds. So, as I was, you know, growing up going through it all, it drove me crazy because I'm like, I look like a However, after doing everything that we just did, it's I think a reverse grip is great for the overall tricep development, but also the medial head, which is a massive, massive underplayed part of the tricep.

[40:30] I feel like I'm talking to myself. He's quiet sometimes. Huh? What'd he say? Even though the medial head is incredibly small, whenever you hit a front double bicep and you have a big long head and then a medial head that's also pronounced, it's a great look whenever you're hitting a front double bicep. separation between all three, the bicep, the long head, and your medial head here. And again, whenever you go up and do the uh crucifix. Yeah. Or the victory pose or however you're doing it. Like if you have uh like again, the variations I can stand here and do them. I could type a step forward and do them. did not change the weight, but you feel a crazy stretch right here. But again, if you're not being stable or

[41:30] you're using too much weight, you're going to start to engage that front delt whenever you start to pull or you get tired and you don't want to do that. And you can step all the way forward and this is going to be your range of motion to here. I personally like it right here. right at the top right before it cuz I can stand here forever because all the tension's now like off with dead in my soul. I have blamed the reasons for my intentions po. Yes, I'm the one who the only one who would carry on this far. I am

[42:30] I am the reason for my engine. The coolest part is is whenever you're on gear and you're eating a ton of food, you're able to notice it immediately. You're able to see like cuz you can feel all the blood, you can start to feel it rush. And especially whenever you have the amount of muscle on your body that you do now, you're able to like Yeah. immediately you feel it and go, "Yes, that works." No, that doesn't that. And you will be able to see the gains within a few weeks as well. So, I always said like four to eight weeks should give you a solid justification if something works or not. All right, everybody. There's

[43:30] your arm day. If your arms suck, you should do an arm day. If you're trying to figure out why your arms aren't growing, you should do an arm day. If you are doing an arm day, you're not doing it hard enough, right? up or lower. Jesus, Ty, we were being we were being motivational. Um, but seriously, uh, these whiteboard workouts are something that everybody asked for. I love doing them because it's a longer format. Um, throw them on like you would a podcast. That way you gain a little bit of perspective, some information, some education, a little bit of what we have going on with Tai. You guys have been watching him for a long time. It's very exciting. I love this Being in this position now, like not being the sauced out psycho and kind of seeing you start going into that world. Yeah. It it it keeps the spark and the fire in me alive for it. And to see the progress. Seriously, the amount of conversations that you and I have had that were uh I hate to say intimate because we just got sweaty together, but intimate conversations where you were like, "What do I need to do? How do I get better? I really want to do this." And then being

[44:32] able to have those conversations and then see the progress that you're having is incredible. And everybody watching, you guys have been watching this occur. You guys have been supporting the out of them. Make sure these two are are are people that make this possible. So support Tai, not Code Tai, but Code Notebook. And then Young Aiden here, Code Aiden for Ax and Sledge, Hilaix, Pride Foods, AR. you guys supporting them is I I don't I mean I obviously benefit from the company, but these guys benefit from it as well. So, I can't thank you guys enough for it. I hope that you guys gain some perspective from this workout. And if you want to see more, tell us what you want to see in the comments. What whiteboard workout next with Ty and I. Other than that, as always, the IRS and give the woman a good slap. Let her know you love her.
