TITLE: Back Day Explained: Full Breakdown
VIDEO ID: f9kNF4P6lRs
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9kNF4P6lRs
UPLOAD DATE: 2025-06-06
DURATION: 78:04
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:02] You think I'm having an effect on him? See, this is the thing with Tai. I told him he needs to start eating gummy bears and utilizing the sugars for the workouts. You know, there's a couple things I never told everybody about the gummy bears. And I'm little secret. Trade secrets. But whenever I saw him break out the container, I'm like, "Did you weigh these out? Did you actually weigh out your gummy bears?" Of course I did. Weigh everything to the gram. Ty is a perfectionist and g of carbs and gummy bears. It's like 72 grams of gummy I go by handfuls. I go by handfuls. Close enough. It's back day. It's going to be a great video. You're going to love this one. New flavor. New Hila mix H2O gummy bears in the pre-workout. Putting a gummy bear putting a handful of gummy bears into the pre-workout does

[01:03] not count. Doesn't count. We're about to kill back. Those calories don't count. They're there. They're going to be utilized. Meatthead math. New flavor of hydraulic tube. Summertime drop. New Helmix. I just got this sent from me. IFBB. Your favorite IFBB Pro. soon to be favorite IFBB Pro one day, huh? Yeah, I got the NPC one. Yeah, that's the one you use. You're not allowed You're not allowed to use this one. That's what I said. I had to talk with Bobby the other day. I was like, I hate when people do that. Like I need to put like retired former. Well, what's the new role? Do you still technically have your pro card? No, I don't. Technically. Technically, I think I can still apply for it. Mhm. And get it, but if I started over, it would be fun. Yeah, Ian's talking about doing that. Who? Who? Ian. Yeah, I know. We talk about it on there. I'm like, could you imagine if all of a sudden like a bunch of retired guys just started entering shows, diced from behind, just nasty as Said if you showed up on my first show, I'd probably never compete again. Dude, a lot of people would be pissed. It'd be funny as But today's back

[02:05] day. Uh Ty beat me on the road to 240. You're already above 250. 253 AM weight. Ty does not count PM weight. No, that doesn't count. AM weight is all that counts. All that matters. Facet faceted am. It kind of counts because you got to be able to pay attention to the difference. But Tai is a perfectionist. If you we call him, you know, the code notebook notebook guy. Guy always had the notebook. I've said it for years and even whenever we first started talking, it was like just document everything. That's the the the bro science to science thing that goes on. I'm like, hey, you are your own science experiment. So, you need to make sure that you document everything that you do so that you know what works and you know what doesn't work. You know how well something worked versus something else. And that's pretty much the reason that we're going to get into today's back workout. Um, and go through a couple things. Okay. So, today's back day. Now, Ty doesn't have a coach. He talks to a lot of people,

[03:07] watches everything. Very methodical. You are like you are like the most non-science-based science-based bro. Yeah, I think that's a good way to put it. Yeah, cuz you watch everything, you read everything, you pay attention to it, but you're you're you're aware enough to say like, I'm going to do what works for me. Okay. So, and I think that's how everybody is. And I would consider you in that intermediate level of training, pushing into the advanced level of training. I think there's a lot of people that think they're better than they are. They're like, "Yes, I'm advanced." And it's like, "No, you're not. You have a lot to learn. There's so much." I would consider myself an advanced uh advanced in training from a bodybuilding perspective, but from other training perspectives, no. From bodybuilding, yes, very advanced. Training is my And that's why we're doing this video today is to talk about Tai's training and his back training specifically. So, right now, Tai's pushing to the next level. And you've been How long? You're seven weeks in to this protocol. Yeah.

[04:09] This the eighth. This is the eighth week. Okay. So, right now, Ty, you've put on how much weight in the past eight weeks? We started at like 231. Yeah. So, we're moving. We're gaining some weight. But what we've noticed is I look at Tai's pictures every single week. Now, my job and and everything with these videos is to help guide you guys into a direction and open up your your your thought process and expand your mind and try different styles of training, try different exercises, try different things to help you guys figure out what works best for you. Now, today the goal is to help to figure ties back out because everything on Tai right now from arms, your arms have gained I think 3 in since we started. Yeah, probably. Chest, shoulders, legs, delts, everything's growing well, re very well. But your back is what is not it's not progressing at the same rate as everything else. Okay. So,

[05:10] if your arms, legs, chest, delts are all progressing in a like like an even manner, well, all of a sudden you're that's how a lagging body part begins to build out. You begin to have a lagging body part because it's not progressing. Now, how does that happen? Tai has a specific way of training. My question to Tai before this video and why we're filming it was, Ty, do you train all of your body parts very similarly? the style of training, the meth the the methodology, the strategy, the sets, the reps, all that. And you said, "Yes, pretty much all of them are the same." Well, it's like, "Okay, now you look like you do because of what you do. You are where you are because of what you're doing." So, at that point, that's when I was like, "Hey, you can see that your back is just not it's progressing from where it was. We're still making great progress, but the other body parts are making even more progress and they're they're I mean your arms have made massive gains. Your legs are crazy

[06:12] looking and your shoulders are really flaring out. And that's why I'm like, "Hey, everything you're doing is working. The food, the protocol, the training, but the back is where it's like not as much." So, so at that point, that's how people begin to have a lagging body part, at least one of the ways. So, my thing was I was like, "Let's go through your training. Let's take a look at what you're doing." And when I look at his training, it's a great program by all means. That should be killing it. Is it? Yes. But your thing was you wanted more. You're like, I want more out of this. And I said, I agree. I think this is this this over the next 8 to 10 weeks could become more of a it could become a lagging body part because of how everything else is progressing. And I think that happens to a lot of bodybuilders and a lot of people just in the gym training in general. So, first of all, when we looked at the training, I was like, "Well, your back looks like it does because of what you're doing." And I said, "We got to I got to get my hands on you. I want to go through all of I

[07:13] want to go through a bunch of different exercises because the way you start with your one-handed pull downs, that should tear up your lower lats. It should be tearing them up." Well, on paper and in studies and everything, it does. But we want more. We need to find something else that's going to really rip them apart and really flare out your lower lats and actually start pushing saying some of this stuff. It's really intense and it's like a as it's it's criticism that's very difficult to hear in bodybuilding because whenever you hear something like that you're like um I I'm not doing enough. Like whenever Connie would criticize something on me, I'd kind of like get down in the dumps for a minute. And that's something where a lot of people get buttth hurt about it. But Tai and I have an understanding where you're not allowed to do that. We have to look at everything very objectively. Be very objective with what's sitting there and say this is what it is and we have to push through because if you get upset or your feelings hurt from a from from anything like this, you ain't going to make it because bodybuilding is the most

[08:15] like they're going to tear you down. Like you could have everything. Like I just got changed into these clothes and I was looking at myself and I'm like, "Ah man, I'm getting older." And and it but it's very revealing cuz you're standing in your underwear and it's like you could have a great upper body or a great front side and then you turn around and it's like, "Ooh, that's where you fall apart." And that's what happens with a lot of people. A lot of people have these body part issues that they don't talk about. Now, the whole reason we were doing this was we have to change up the back training. We don't have to change anything else. It's just back that we have to start working with. Now, people might be like, "Well, what am I supposed to do? That's what we're going to figure out today. That's the whole goal that we're going that's the whole thing we're trying to do over the next several weeks. We're not going to figure it all out in one workout. I have to go through. We're going to do some We're going to do some bend over rows. We're going to do overhand. We're going to do underhand. We're gonna pull. Whenever we're going through this whole workout,

[09:17] whenever we do bend over row, we might be here and it's like, okay, do an overhand bend over row. Well, what positioning are you? Are you bent over in this position? Or is your body at like more of a 45° angle? Are you in a 90° angle? Whenever you're pulling, are you pulling up to your sternum? Are you pulling to your belly button? Are you waistline? When? Same thing if you're doing underhand. Now, whenever we're doing this, theoretically, whenever you do an underhand uh barbell row to pull to your waist, you should be murdering your lower lats. But what happens if I just pull it slightly above into my belly button rather than my waistline? Well, that makes a difference. Where's my body position? How are my feet placed? Is my body position more like this? Am I a little more bent over? Then when I come up, I stand a little more upright row. So, I'm like horse cocking the weight a little bit. getting a little body English with it. All those little details are going to matter when we're doing so. So, the whole thing is what Tai has been doing has been working, but only to a certain

[10:20] degree for back. We need to intensify that because when you're in a push state and you're really trying to gain much more muscle, especially so that we don't fall behind in that area, we got to try a bunch of different a ton of different They might work, they might not work. And that's where the benefit of having a coach or having someone sit down, a mentor, anything like that to help you get to the next level. And that's what this that's what the goal of today is. So, we're going to get into it. Two sets of 10. Start with like a neutral just like you had there. Start. Hands slightly moved out a little bit wider on this next set.

[11:34] little bit wider than you just were. We'll do one more a little bit wider. Now, I don't want you to try too hard to make sure that your chin goes above there, okay? Cuz what'll happen is is whenever you go to pull up too much, you might incorporate uh traps might start to incorporate your traps and pull. Cuz what'll happen is that's how you end up like pulling pulling pulling a muscle. The romboid ter major, Terry's minor cuz you're trying to something a weaker body part, a weaker muscle might try and push you up too hard. Rather than do so, just right where you feel comfortable going cuz all we're trying to do is wake everything up and put blood into it. Okay. See what I mean? Yeah. See the difference? Cuz the wider you start to go, like it's like there's no way you're going to be able to pull your big ass all the way up. And we don't we're not trying to get perfect full repetitions.

[12:37] We just want to push blood. All right. This one I want you to do the reverse. If you've ever watched old school back workouts by me, I used to do 100 pull-ups before every single workout. That was my warm-up. Now, people were like, "Seth, that's overkill. A lot of science guys probably give me a lot of about it." Here's how I looked at it. I never grew a back until I started doing like that. I used to take a fuckload of gear, eat a ton of food, yacked out of my

[13:39] mind with everything. If I'm eating 5 to 6,000 calories a day, taking a bunch of gear, and my back's not growing from what I'm doing previously, I should probably start doing some wild I didn't do pull-ups cuz I was a Because they were hard. I made excuses. I just like pull downs more. Pull downs ain't going to get you a back. It's not going to happen. pull-ups. I did every variation under the sun. 10 sets of 10. Then I would start my back workout. Why? Because I had so much running through my body that I could handle it. So that's what I did. Focus on pulling with your pinkies. So that way whenever you're coming up, I want this Okay, stick your chest up and chin up a little

[14:39] more. Pull with them pinkies. Slow, slow on the way down. There you go. Good. Do one more wide. Take a breather. I'm not going to be pulling the same weights you are. You'll surprise

[15:40] yourself. You always do. No, I don't think so. Not Not this time. Not this time. Not this time. Okay, we're going to do reverse grip barbell rows. This is something that Tai normally doesn't do. You go ahead. You were saying whenever you do barbell rows, I do overhand most of the time does overhand, which I love. But whenever you do any exercise, like you said, you're like, whenever I do uh bend overs, I feel it a lot in my mid and upper back. No matter where I pull to, whatever body position you're in, you hit a lot of mid and upper back. It's not a bad thing, but we want to start, we want to utilize an exercise to really smash the lower lats. Now, something for me was the pull-ups. Pull-ups are what helped begin the process of the meat racks, big hanging lats. But with this, I did a lot of reverse grip barbell rows. And now

[16:41] the body position, we're going to work on that. And we're going to get you to feel them because you need to do some exercises from an old school mentality. Do some exercises where that weight's just yanking on that on that part of your muscle. So that way we can get a good connection with it. And for me, reverse grip barbell rows, keeping your elbows tucked in nice. Now, we might have bend over a little further. We might stand up a little bit more. We're going to do all of them so that you can feel the difference because just because on your paper it says bend over barbell row doesn't mean that you're going to do exactly what that person was wanting you to do. We have to figure it out. I like shoulder width apart. I like the concept of my hands being right there like on the outside in line with my hips on or at least the quads right there. Now I don't have to shove it all the way up. I'm just bringing it right to my waist like right there.

[17:50] Don't focus too much. I'm pulling with this part of my hand. Too far down. Too far. Right there. Yes. Little slower. I bend over a little more. Good. You can feel them working. Yeah. You feel that lower portion? You can tell. Yeah. You can tell they're working, but you can feel everything else, too. Yeah. Like you could feel how much more how how much mid and uppers. Yeah. Yeah. So, again,

[18:54] cuz midback's not the problem with me. Ty's midback's huge. No, it's not the problem. It's lower lats. But again, the only way to do it is to start around to find out what's going to work best. We'll work up in weight a little bit. We'll keep working up in weight and we'll find out. Now, I told you that I didn't want you going too far down. Cuz normally what I noticed is habits. Like with my habits, whenever I was trying to break a habit, I'd have to comp I' if I if I was trying to break a habit of something or switch something up, I would kind of start from scratch rather than do things like I did the other muscle groups. So that way those other those stronger parts of the muscle group don't take over. So that's why I was like, just hang out here, do a few reps here, bend over a little more, do a few reps there, and we'll continue to do it as the weight goes up. Cuz for me personally, I feel like the more vertical I am, the more trapped upper back too. So that's why I was saying pull with this portion of your hand. So I noticed if you'll watch old school videos of me as

[19:55] well. This is me. I hold guns in my hands that way. I'm like I can't use my index finger and thumb cuz once I did biceps biceps started taking over and then upper back cuz right here I had never had any issues with it was always the meat in the lower lat. So I was like if I remove these and I did it by pull downs. That's how I first did it. But that's why I do it with these as well. Like use your verse grips or use wraps or whatever run. Good. There we go.

[20:59] Good. Nice. One of the tough things with an underhand grip is that you're going to be much weaker than your overhand grip. It takes time to adjust with your wrists. It's a little more uncomfortable. It might not be so much, you know, 130, 145, 135, 185, 225. You break once you start moving up. It's like it's it's just a lot on a fully supenated wrist wrist. So, uh, what you can do is if that's uncomfortable to get the same effect, you can use like a camber bar, an easy bar, and just load those up on a curl bar and still get a pull. But I personally love a straight bar. It has been a minute since I did these.

[21:59] I do. You know what sucks? I connect way better with my right side. Do you? I can feel my right side so much more pumped up right now. Like I do a ton of pull-ups, but right now doing that I'm like, "Fuck." You can feel it. Because with this exercise, when I started doing it, I envision this. Yes. Set my feet that back that back lat spreadshot. So all I'm doing with this is like, "Yes. Yes." I think that's kind of one of the lost arts in today's training is that like incorporating a movement that rep like represents a pose like doing a movement that replicates what you're doing on stage. I feel the same. I just don't know. I'm like I'm I ain't too smart but I'm like hey that's all I would do is think of that. So cuz in my head I was able to connect that thought cuz that's what we're doing. I don't know anybody that goes, "No, we're all Yeah. Yeah.

[23:01] Good. Good. Nice. Nice. Nice. You can feel the blood from the first set to now. They're way denser. Yeah. Ton more. For anybody that's do any part like the back is such a big muscle group that it deserves its own day cuz you're in my opinion you need six exercises on back day. So you're saying you wouldn't do upper lower with two exercises? No, Ty. I can't do it. I can't justify. I don't give a if it works for you and it it don't work in my head. Work for me. But I think that with that soap, like if you have you can have lagging parts of a back. Yes. Not only can you have a lagging back from a body part perspective, dude, we were just looking at your pictures and we'll put them in the video. Your midback is nuts. Your upper back is developing

[24:01] great, but your lower lats are not catching up at that same rate. And that's normal for a younger competitor. It's super normal because lower lats are usually a mature body part that grows. If you have lower lats as a young amateur, you're holy But it's something that I I turned pro without lower lats. You know what I mean? My back is now one of my better body parts, whereas before it was the worst body part. And it just takes time and effort and the the time to figure it all out. And I think it's like too when we talked about like when we were struggling with my arms, when you don't have a lot of muscle there in the first place, it's hard to build a connection. So like you have to build the muscle first, then the connection almost comes later on when you have more tissue. And it's and it's hard to say that because to a lot of people that sounds ass backwards, but it's almost like you just got to keep doing it. You you A lot of guys that that that have built phenomenal physiques early on, we're just horse cocking weights to ah I'm just doing anything that works. And it's like then as you get more into that intermediate space, you can start to feel it. You start to feel it. You start to develop a philosophy because we're

[25:02] just moving some weights and figuring the exercise. We're not even setting a rep range. We're not even setting the concepts of top sets and drop sets. We're trying to connect. So, there's so much to this that's very difficult cuz we're trying to get to that next level. And you can't get there without crawling. Does your lower back get pumped anymore? No. Uh-uh. I don't take enough steroids. Good. There we go. I like it. I like it. Good. Good. More.

[26:10] Nice. That's a good set. Good set. I need to stop training like a That high rock I swear to God, I have multiple personalities. It lowers your testosterone. Ah, no. No, it doesn't. Ty, you. Bye. We'll do one more. Um, one more here and then I want to uh want to lower the weight. Let's try a couple other things with this. Ty's got a little bit of body English with this. Now, some people will be

[27:12] like, you're cheating. Too much movement during the exercise. Now, listen. I have zero problem with putting a little body English and a little movement on it as long as you stay in control of the weight. You have to stay in control of the weight and from what I can tell you're getting a good connection. If all of a sudden you're and we're not making that solid connection, then we have a problem. But you can tell good connection. You're in control of the weight. And that's all that matters. So after that, we'll I want to try one a little stricter and feel it. But unmove the weight. Nice and strong. Come on. Nice. Nice. Good. Come on. Come on.

[28:16] Good. Good. Come on. Couple more. Nice. It's my lower back. I used to put like icy hot Ben Gay. Oh, really? On my lower back. I mean, it was a bad idea because then my taint and lower testicles would be cooked. But the sweat goes on your back. I used to. yeah. There we go.

[29:17] Do no body angles. Okay. Couple real low. Couple a little higher. Couple a little higher. Like three different levels. Okay. like like a like a like 90 degree 45 and like a 70. Yeah. I do like three or four at reps at each one. Okay. Just strict controlled. If you don't get a good pull, rerrackck it. I just want to get I feel good. Little higher up now. More strict. more strict. Up a little higher. There you go. Right there. Yes. I know your lower back's killing you. Yeah. But did you whenever you were like 90 to that 45 in there, your lower lats

[30:19] were way more activated. That's once you came up higher, my my traps and your midback and traps took right over. You just felt all the blood and all the tension literally like the second you went from here to when you went here to here completely gone completely gone. So even whenever you're doing cuz whenever you tend to do even e that will even work to a certain degree for overhands but whenever you go from down here and that's why whenever if an if you have an overhand and you're pulling it's going to matter where you're pulling that arm path and where your elbows are heading. Like people are always like, "Oh, pull with your elbows." Well, I could still pull with my elbows doing this, but it's going to be upper back. But if you pull back with your elbows into that rowing position, it's forcing you to do your lower lats. It shouldn't be called pull with your elbows. It should be like where your elbows, like the path of your elbows going. I all whenever people told me to pull with my elbows, I had such a hard time understanding how to pull with my elbows. That's where holding guns in my hands came from because I was like, "Oh, if I just do this, it's almost

[31:20] impossible for me to pull any other way." Yeah, but if I have overhand grip and I pull to my belly, I want to make sure that my arm path is a rowing motion. And whenever you start to use some weight, you get to 225, 275, 315, 365, you're horsecocking some weights and you're looking cool in the gym and you're Yeah. But you might be making no connection with the part of the muscle group that you actually want to work. So it's just that I'd say yeah success reverse grips pulling low being relatively low that 90 to 45 in between there like even if it's a 30° angle cuz with the reason that I like underhand so much for this if your if your wrists and everything is you're able to do so and supenate that way it's impossible to like pull up. Yeah. Because if you're pulling up like that, it's going to be a bicep curl. It's no longer a row. You want it to be a row. You like have to row

[32:23] into that. So, it's like that's why it's Yes. Yeah. And then same thing back. After I do some type of rowing motion, like a low row, I would always I personally loved going back and forth between exercises with like a like a low row of some sort into a high pulley cable uh row or pull down of some sort. I loved it. So, I like the close grip pull downs. I love it because my goal with this whenever I'm doing a close grip pull down, all I'm thinking is close grip. You can see you can see what happens to my lat if I'm just looking in the mirror. We're just here. You can see what happens to it whenever I go from like a wide grip pull down to a reverse grip. Like you see all of a sudden you see the lat pop out. So whenever I'd have a close grip pull down, chest up, chin up, and I could feel I want to feel my seratus ripping

[33:25] apart cuz I want to start moving some weight. That's why I would like doing it earlier on in my workout because then I could use some heavier weights with it and really get into it where I'm sitting here and I'm like and I also love reverse grips, but we just did a reverse grip. So, I want to do a close grip pull. Chest up and I'm going to pull down. I'm really going to focus on starting to move some weight and tearing that serratus on the long stretch up and you're going to see it's going to engage the lat and pull down. Okay. So, we're trying to get the meat rack, the the ham hawk going. Not so much. We don't have an issue with upper back and midback. We're going to focus on that lower lat. And after that, we're going to do some more iso rows.

[34:28] Good. Nice big stretch. There you go. Stretch. Nice. Good. Good. That's good. You're really strong. I should be. Yeah, you're really strong right now. You can see I can feel it activating. But you need you need way more weight. Yeah. Good control the body English. I personally love it. I I think that within training you should have a rhythm. Okay. But the controlled rhythm of such watch for a train back. Perfect example. Yeah. I I I believe in it because I think that's how I developed my biceps and my delts all from like a rhythm a rhythm style of training. There isn't one science guy that says you do side laterals, right? But look at your pictures from 2018. You have the craziest side delts I've ever seen. I again, this is why I just or like even when you were when you were

[35:29] doing that thing with me back in like October and you hit the most muscular like there's a picture you were taking the video in the mirror that one night and it's like it's crazy. Well, again, that's why I I just think that's why training's cool. Like also Rean Grimes the way he does his whatever he does like them things. It's like dude there's I tried them. I just could not I could not figure it out. But it doesn't matter. It works for him. And he has one of the craziest silhouettes from behind. Like that upper back he's got going on looks wow. Again, nobody else would be like that's a good idea. I just I just think that there's a style. Everybody needs to develop their style, not the style from the book. that book. your book. You write your own, That's right. There are no rules. No rules. Like, that's why I fell in love with this This is the one sport. There's zero rules. There's no rules. Nobody. There's no rules. That's the coolest

[36:29] thing in the world to me. At the end of the day, alls they care about is how you look on stage. They don't care. You don't get an award if you took less drugs. You don't get in the award if you took more drugs. The only thing that matters is how you look on that day. That's it. Like that's that's why I was so attracted to it. I just loved it. Stop. Stop. Just take another breather. Let that tear. Get a big stretch. Nice. Good. Big pull. Two

[37:31] more. Nice. You feel it now? Yeah. Personally for me, I put the seat down a little bit so I can't because if I slide in too far where it gets like into my hips, I can't I pull up to like my chest and I can't get my elbows. That was legitimately going to be cuz whenever I got in here, I was going to say you saw me kick myself out. You cut heels like right on your waist when you got So again, if your paper says close grip pull downs, close grip pull down machine, but how your legs stick into here is going to dictate a lot. I'll use a really light weight to explain. So whenever you're here, if you're here with the pull down and you have a little bit of movement, you're going to move. You're going to brace yourself differently. should be locked in there. Okay. Now, sometimes people will work into here. Now, if I do so, watch how my

[38:31] the the line of pull plays a and it's different for everybody. Somebody have longer torso, longer arms. It's different for everybody. But if I'm here and I lean back a little more, I'm going to feel it in my upper back more so. And in order to get my lower lats, I want to pull this to my sternum. But if I'm here like this, like you can see the line of pull is almost like pushing back into it. So now if I move myself out, brace myself like this is a calf machine almost. I'm stuck in here. Now I can lean back, arch my chest up, and pull right in there, and I'm going to smash my lower legs. Okay? Okay, my elbows start to flare out. I want my elbows tucked in tight like I'm pulling down and it's going to crush my lower legs. Again, this is a pull down machine. I could be tight into here. I'm still doing the pull down, but it's not the same path that I'm here. I'm right in this area. Whereas, if I just move my body out and pull straight down again,

[39:33] right to my sternum, got the weight And I can even get now like I can lean forward in a massive stretch. So whenever I start to use some weight, I'm getting a crazy pull on my seratus and lower lat. Good. Also very good are singles. I do enjoy singles. Okay. However, in my opinion, you cannot get the same brutal intensity from a single arm as you can a

[40:34] two-handed movement. Two-handed movement, you are able to use a little more weight and get way more intense with it. Whenever you start to get individualized, I would start to consider that the isolation exercises that are very beneficial but not as beneficial in building meat. I like single arm stuff. A a single arm like free pull down where I can have my hand pronated into a supernated position and get a great squeeze. yeah. Great isolation. But building meat intensity. Nice. Nice. One more. Good. On this one. Stay a little bit but stay a little more upright. Give yourself five more seconds. Four. 3. Two. One.

[41:40] There you go. Nice. Nice. Good. Three more. One, two, three. Big stretch. Big stretch. Stretch. Two more. One. Two. One more. Nice. You're right, dude. That's one thing I need to work on. Sometimes I get too far. I start yanking too far back. Well, sure. It's bound to happen. But that's what what I wanted to I wanted you to get the feel. I wanted you to get the feel so you could figure that out yourself. Yeah. You know what I mean? Like so that way like dude, I get into it as well. But you I personally believe that when you're at your level of training that intermediate into the advanced, bro, you got to start moving some weight. That's the only way you're going to gain control of your body and the weight together. And then drop it down and then

[42:42] get a squeeze and be like, "Oh, there it is." Yeah. We're not doing any upper back today. No upper or midback. It's all lower lat focused. So, last time is it my turn first? I don't care first. I don't I don't remember. I don't honestly don't remember either. I don't give a I don't give a

[43:54] What? I know why your upper back's so big. It's very dominant. It's very I know. It does. It like you can tell your lower lats. Yeah. You can tell your lower lats are a little beat up right now because your your upper back I can feel it the whole time. So, uh, like it works for a part of your back. I want to do this in a way where we're going to smoke your lower lats. We're going to change it up a little bit just because again, another variation. That's all this is. They're just different variations of all these different exercises. And that's that thing intermediate to advanced is figuring out how to manipulate all these cuz even your body positioning on here like whenever your your body position on here like that's it works. Yeah. But I want to switch it up so that we can uh get a little bit of a different feel here. Put your hand on my lower lat like a whole grip like palm that pad. You can you can turn your uh

[44:55] turn your pad over so that this is you know yeah flip it over a little bit on your wrist and like you can stand like on this side and literally just cut my cut my whole lap. I'm feeling my lower lat further down. So what I want you to do is you'll feel it all. Okay. Yeah. Now, like this is kind of how you did it. Like I don't even know how you did it. Can't even I just lean a little bit to the right to depress this shoulder to try to keep my traps from kicking like that.

[45:55] I want your chest pinned on there. Okay. Okay. Now, what I want you to do here, lightly pull on that. Get in here. Now, you feel how this thing right here. No. No. No. No. No. You stay even. Okay. Now, I want you to just lift it off a bit. Lift it off. There you go. Now you're bracing yourself with this. Yeah. Okay. Use the chest. Now just pull. Keep that elbow push. Push. There we go. Do that. hand still like in this positioning I just feel like still I'm too you are like I feel like I need something that my hand can like you you are immediately it just goes

[46:56] upper back like even keeping your elbow tucked you somehow are still doing upper back with Try it again do do three reps that way the way I was trying to get you to do it there. Now do it three reps your way. Not a lower lat exercise for you. Yeah. Not. Okay. Do it overhand though. Oh yeah. Yeah. Great connection up there. Yeah. Some now uh do the other side. I want to watch that too. Yeah. Nope. No lower lats with this your upper

[47:59] back. Like literally your just it it does not after what we were feeling after what I felt over there with those two exercises compared to this. It doesn't even come close. Like it's not even remotely close. Like this is this is to be honest for you. I would utilize the upper the overhand grip for upper back exercise and that's it because this is in comparison not even close like Yeah. Yeah. That's crazy. I've never seen never seen that before. You've been You've been doing these forever. That's nasty. That's nasty as

[49:00] Pull with them pinkies. Ooh. Oh, I'm feeling that now. Yeah, right there. Right there. Right there. Yeah. Okay. Shorter range of motion. Okay. Good. Tight. You all right? I'm sweating so bad. It's in my eyes. Oh, yeah. feet tank top. No, I'm good. Shorter range of motion. Yeah. Don't try and go all the way back. Yeah, cuz I feel like when my when I start to get back, this just contracts. Bro, you see it right now since we're we're this is like fourth exercise in after doing all the pull-ups and after that, bro, you see it once you get once you get to this point and then

[50:03] pull more, bro, your upper back just goes, it takes over the exercise completely, which isn't a bad thing because it's still helping your back grow, but we're since we're trying to target like right to there and that's it. No more. The second you go like 2 in further, it's like, bro, you just see that like a mountain starts to form. Yeah. That's the cool part about bodybuilding, though. You know what I mean? Even though it's like that's the part where you have to be able to take criticism. Like that's the hardest thing with working with Hanie. You're going to lose. Like that's what I don't get. These guys get so buttth hurt over criticism. It's like if you don't change, you're going to lose. You will. Yes. Working with Hanie was very difficult uh in the in the beginning. Even it was just difficult working with him because I wasn't I was not mature enough to really take the heavy criticisms like even though like I was very very very good my mentality was not as strong as my body was at that time where it's like you have to be able to

[51:03] hear like okay cool story you're doing good but I'm going to tell you that's not good enough we're trying to get to the next levels and even like I mean you just talked to other people that worked with Bonnie and they're like yeah that guy but that's what it's supposed to But and it was never egotistical from his end. It was getting you better. Yeah. I actually felt myself do it there at the end. with them. Nice. Too far back. Too far back. Right there. Right

[52:04] there. Big stretch. I want you to do big stretch. There you go. Big stretch. Squeeze. Nice. Big stretch. Nice like this. Over the head. Puts your hand over your head. Stretch it out. Yeah. Feel that. Mm- We need more of that. Mhm. More of that. This one. Oh yeah, you can feel it. Mhm. Yeah. Yep. I think it's the most difficult I think it's the most difficult body part to get to grow. Mhm. I agree for sure. I don't think it's Especially cuz I have higher inserting lats, too. You know who has really good backs? This

[53:05] is This is where I get so caught up with the science guys. You know who has really good backs? Gymnasts. Yeah, gymnast dude. Those girls on the other side of this wall, they live on a pull-up bar. They live on a pull-up bar. Their delts, rear delts and backs are insane. My 11-year-old has a back that's insane. Guess what, Reps. Lots of them. stupid volume. They don't worry about fatigue. No, You are fatigued. It is not real. Be Yeah, you live in it. Uh like uh so whenever they do bars, they'll do bars for 2 hours straight. Yeah. Every day like three days in a row bars two hours. Tell me if I want to I've seen guys do this. I don't know if this would help me at all. Nope. No. Dude, you do something on this exercise like what what I just said. I think two-handed exercises are king in

[54:05] building mass. I think the two-handed over like that's one of my favorite upper back exercises. I love it. I've been doing like for when I do the powerhouse. I put that all the way down and then I'll stand on it almost like a standing tea bar. Yeah, dude. You got no issues. You got no issues up here. No, it's all lower. It's all lower lat. Your upper back is so much stronger. And I think that I think it's going to be time with arm path. And remember this too, bro. Your arms are significantly bigger and stronger than they were. Mhm. So like they're going to take over on certain exercises as you continue to develop. Like they'll take over, but you do something on this machine that literally removes your lower leg. Good to know. There's two and a half years down the road. No, no, we're learning, We're learning. I turned pro with a mediocre back. I didn't do pull-ups. I honestly started doing pull-ups

[55:06] because of watching Johnny and Jackson. That's a few people. He said, "I just do pull-ups." Like, it was so simple because it was like his legs were not great. Okay. But his back was insane. So, I think that it was one of those things that we're talking about here was everything on my physique was pretty good except my back. As a professional, my arms and back were lacking. to that next level. I trained them all the same and I was like, "Okay, so I'm going to change my back training and then I have to change my arm training. I have to prioritize each one of them in their own special way and change up the methodologies and strategies and intensifiers." And I and that's whenever I was Johnny. I was like, "What do you do?" Pull-ups, dude. You do pull-ups? No, you should do pull-ups. That's all I had to hear. I was like, "Okay, I'm going to do pull-ups." Then I got back. I connected way better. I started figuring things out.

[56:17] We're getting into like starting to fatigue. Starting to fail. I don't know if this is a good idea. No, but uh like typically in a back workout, you're obviously not going to do four or five lower lat exercises. It's you're you're just you're not going to make it the whole time. Usually in a workout, I would have two to three lower lat exercises and I might even consider like rack pulls something that I could hit my lower lats with because I was able to make that good connection with them. Um, but I get my back out of it. Cuz when I do a rack pull, I think about like obviously I pull my lats tight, but when I come up, I think about you you im Yes, I was going to say you you're doing that with all of your dude. Like cuz you have a from behind a great relaxed pose, but you can see it in your relaxed pose how much stronger your your mid upper back is into your lowers. So, it's just got to make those adjustments. But we're gonna try out an exercise now uh

[57:19] that Ty does a lot that to just analyze how well it's targeting cuz in his head he's making the connection. But like actually having someone feel it or see it also helps as well. very similar to that. Yeah. What do you think I'm doing wrong? I don't think you're doing anything wrong, dude. Yeah. I think it's just a timing thing as well. I think whenever we're doing this,

[58:20] we're looking like look at it as a hierarchy of exercises. This is dude, for me, I just felt it. It I connect with it pretty well. I can feel it. Like what what what happens is is you do not have that same tissue like you have higher lat insertions to begin with. So it's like we just need to continue to keep building those lats down in a sense. But whenever we were doing those reverse grip rows Yeah. and that up and and then a high close grip pull your lower lats, you could feel the stretch from all the way down here creeping into your waistline cuz your lats are up here still. Okay. So now they're creeping down. And in my opinion, it's not that this is this is a bad exercise. It's not that that's a bad exercise from a hierarchy standpoint. those two are levels, not one level, but two at least two levels above where they are. And it's and it's just that thing

[59:20] of kind of starting to have to change that mindset of where to put them cuz this is it's not that this is a bad exercise. Like I I dig it, but I think I connect much better with it cuz I have much more meat in my lower lats than that. And it just takes time. Same thing with like how we talked about my triceps a few months ago. Bro, look at your arms in comparison where they were last year to now. You did you were just finished the DC show last year. You were 208 pounds. 2011 2011. We are literally 50 52 pounds AM weight difference. It's a massive difference. The amount of tissue that's grown. So, as you're doing that, you are not the same competitor you were last year. Not even close. You're not the same guy you were 6 months ago. So, as we progress and and as your body changes, the hierarchies of the of the of the exercises are going to change in the next 6 months. It might change again. Like, so those are the and that's why I'm like just doing those two. There's one more exercise. There's

[60:21] two more I want to try real quick to see because I think like seeing this, bro, I I dig it. I thought I thought Fruitcates did this exercise and I hate you doing it, but I'm like actually pretty cool exercise. I just had to try it. There's two I want to try with you for that for the for the path. Yeah. Placement and then how much it activates because you're we saw we were talking about it last week in your pictures. That midback is just so strong. And typically that's something that most people can't build. Cuz I didn't have that at all last year. No. Yeah. So something's working. Yeah. But now it's just piecing everything together. The fun part. Mhm. There's no there's no rhythm. Yeah, that's a difficult thing in my head to building like if we're saying like you're we're building we're breaking muscles down and building muscle tissue, but like you can't horse the weights here. You got to have strict form and like it's a great squeeze. It's that isolation thing I referred to in my

[61:22] head. And you're right, this is a better pool. Mhm. Yeah. Should I have you try something? Yeah. Brace your right foot like how I do it. Brace your right foot up here. So you're more brace like Oh, like this. And then like I try to pull my elbow down and like get my literally touch my elbow in my back pocket. That's what I think. Oh, okay. And on your way up like d it's like you're dragging the weight on the floor and pulling a lot more. I see what you mean. I I I feel it. I don't like it personally. I just don't I don't know. I'm just But I get it. I can feel it. See, like that's the thing. Like it's the same. You could say whatever you

[62:23] call this. Me doing it this way. It's the same exercise, but you'd have to explain where to place your foot, how to brace yourself, the path, cuz it's a good exercise. I just like So, in my head, whenever I do this, I feel like I'm overcompensating the exercise. I feel like I'm trying to overexaggerate it. That's why I I put the my right foot up so I can't It's to like close the tip off so I can't over rotate cuz like a lot a lot of guys when they do a dumbbell row like a lot of guys like have their feet like this and that's when you see the hip the hip open up a lot. But that's why I do it with my I feel like that's what like I feel here I'm impossible. Yeah, that's even better. I feel like I feel like I can't open up anything. I feel like maybe if I leaned in more Yeah. I mean, I might get it. That's I've never tried like that, but that's actually a good point. But like just me personally, like that bracing I think it's from like the T-

[63:23] bar rows like cuz I have a I have a horrendously weak T- bar row. But it's like because I literally bury my face. Yeah. You don't want to into it. Like I don't want to do this cuz every time I did it, I pull I pull back muscle. I'd pull my romboid or something. and I'd be like, "Ah, I feel like I'm having a heart attack." Or a rib head would pop out from the heavy weight like pulling myself in. And like that's why whenever I was always here or the pee bar. Yeah. And it was always like weak. And I see online like being like, "Oh, Nick Walker has a weak I was going to say, did you see that video? He has a weak uh tea bar." I'm like, listen, if you put a plate on that on that T- bar, have you done the Arsenal humbler? It's a horrible machine. It's horrible. It's heavy as Yeah, dude. Like, nothing on there is like a decent finisher. But like I always and and and me personally, like I like the T- bar uh chest assisted T- bar overhand

[64:25] for a great upper back exercise. Okay. But then if you bury yourself and use that like uh that angled or a neutral grip, bro, smoke your lower lats. See, Powerhouse has a uh a T- bar that has a neutral grip. So, I might need to try that cuz I seem to connect well like with that here real quick. We'll do it real quick. Feel it. So, I know I again the height's a pain in the but all all we're trying to do lats lower lats. We don't even give a about the weight. Like, this thing. It's like I don't care if you're using one plate. I just want your lower lats to grow. Oh, let it stretch more. Let it stretch more. Yeah. Hey, you feeling right there? I can feel that. Yeah. More down. Stay down. Yep. Like

[65:30] Hey, but that's what you're doing, dude. You're not a You're not all two-handed exercises, all any lower lat, that's what you're doing. Two-handed exercises. Control. Get a little find your find your rhythm with it. That the same body, the same way your lats are firing from reverse grip is the same thing that that that I don't feel a lot of lats. And I think even with like the neutral grip on a powerhouse, it's like I even get better upper back, lower lats, and pay attention like how you can grip whenever you're gripping up here versus the middle versus the end. Yeah. Okay. And always always pull with your pinkies on like the this this portion these. Yeah. Like always pull with it on here and keep your chest buried. Cuz dude, this is this isn't a lot of weight, but dude, three plates on this on this one is a I think that's the one thing I was I used to have no midback at all. So I was

[66:31] so focused on like when I was with Morgan, it was like all the only thing we worried about was scapular retraction because I had my back was flat at the board. Like well again that's important. It is it it's all important. Your back is a mass dude. You got to have like you got to have an upper back. Well that consists of traps, romboids, tererry's majors, tererry's minor and your rear delts. Like it's all incorporated. But then you have your lower lats, dude. There's four there's four parts to your back and your erectors. Like it's five. We got to think about I'm supposed to fit all that into one back workout or into one week. However you do, pushpull legs, bro split, upper, lower. there's a lot of to cover. So, it's like, yes, you need to be fueled. You need to be prepared and you need to be in it and be able to connect. Otherwise, there's going to be pieces that miss cuz dude, just taking my clothes off by myself revealed how much I don't work out now compared

[67:31] to where I was in October last year. I'm like, But it's yeah, it's a it's process. Try them again. I just want to do six here and I want to feel and then I want you to move the whole way to the end on the next down here. Yep. Here. Just give yourself a little bit of a break down. You feel them? Big difference. Little more. Little more on your right side. A little more further out there. Like right on the edge, dude. Yeah. Cool. I like it a little more here. Like a little more here. or go. I was going to say I feel like you all you started

[68:32] losing it and I saw it pop up there as well. I start pop up. So I think right neutral. Yeah. What' you say? I was saying that like I think part of the reason too is I've been trying to be like so specific with my lower lats that I do a lot of single arm stuff and then I can't get like aggressive with them. So it's like try to be too what what's the word I'm looking for? You're trying to be too perfect. Yeah. that that is I I personally believe that because you are a perfectionist. You want to make sure that you are optimizing literally every part of your life for as much as you can where it's like like I said like you're like the most bro sciency sc you're like the you have the most science out of any bro there is because you're like well why wouldn't you there's there's there's methodologies that work and there's also like you're like why wouldn't this is the exercise I should do I should connect with it. You want to make sure that you're doing everything perfect. Like you are a perfectionist searching for perfection. That's how a lot of us are. One of my biggest problems growing up was breaking

[69:33] those molds. And I've told you this mult times in private. Like I personally had a very I have I had a very big OCD problem. Like I used to color code all of my clothes. Yeah. It was a big problem for me. I was a psychopath. I'm very weird about how my clothes are folded. I'm very weird about a lot of things and I in order for me to get like better with training, I had to break those things. So like I see a lot of those qualities in you. You're like I need to be perfect with this. And that's why I was saying like we got to start like that the body English the rhythm horsecock and a little weights because I think at this stage in your in your in your career in your in your journey that's where we have to start breaking away from that and being like it let's do some wild Yeah because it's like everything but again it's it's hard because look at the size of your forearms dude. We're talking about like we're talking about like levels cuz everything you're doing is working so well now and it's

[70:35] like but it's hard to break that mold cuz bro I was for for years being a perfectionist is like a gift and a curse. Yes, it is. You know it's it's awesome. It's awesome because like it's such a you want to search for how you can be the best you could be. But then it's a curse because then it might take away from other parts of life. Do a reverse grip on here. I just want to weigh out the options. You want me to stand slightly bent over? Uh yeah. Yeah. Little movement. Too much movement. No movement. You feel them down here? Yeah.

[71:39] Yeah. I like that exercise for you. I was gonna say either that or Well, that's what I was gonna try next. I want to I I wanted to go through a couple different handles. So, whenever we're putting your workout together, that way when we're putting a workout together, you're doing your you're doing your seated cable rows. It's like, well, what grip at what body position? I like that one the best. Come up a little more now. Now I want you to sit upright. Chest up. Yeah.

[72:49] No, no, no. Once I start coming up, my midback once you once you come up, it immediately turns into mid upper back. Yeah. Immediately. It's almost cuz I remember Flex Lewis. I I years ago I saw him leaning over much more doing close reps. Yeah. And that's whenever I started I was like, "Oh, I'm going to try those." And I started noticing. I'm like, "Oh, I'm getting a nasty connection." And you start to manipulate with when you're pulling. It's kind of like when does arching my back does sticking my neck up and chest out, does it help or does it make it worse? I notice it whenever my chest is up and my neck's up, I can't get the same pull all the way through. Cuz once I start pulling through a lot of mid mid and upper back takes over and I'm like so if I'm here and I'm just closer range of motion that shorter range of motion. Yeah.

[73:51] I'm on the bottom. Really? Yeah. I'm all the way all the way lower. No. I've never done it before. I've always done middle or upper. I'm I pulled from the bottom. Set from the bottom up. Hey, this is great. I mean, I think we have like a 2hour video here, but I I I think that it's cool because I want I want the whole purpose of having this type of YouTube channel is to be educational for everybody and for people

[74:52] to be able to gain knowledge from this type of experience. Even though it's long, I don't really care because today we figured out a lot about you personally, bro. You're an aspiring bodybuilder. You're making a ton of progress. Ton of progress. This is the heaviest you've ever been. This is the best you've ever looked. This is the biggest your arms have ever been. You're putting together a physique. You're sculpting a physique and you're becoming better. But it's like there's things that whenever rather than wait, oh, 16 weeks. No, we have to continue to assess and see what's going on. And you're aware enough to be like, hey, this is an issue. This is an issue. Seth, what do you think? I'm glad you noticed the same thing I did, Ty. Let's talk about it. And then today it's like we've been talking about this for a couple weeks now, but it's like what did we learn? You need to do two-handed exercises for your lower lats cuz it doesn't even, like I said, it's levels the difference between the two. Reverse grip, reverse grip, uh, barbells. This, all three of these, all three that we used activate way better than anything

[75:53] that you've been doing. Yes. Even though those exercises, they're working your lower lats. Why? because they're better than they were before. Yeah. But are they as good as everything else? Are they progressing at the same rate? No. So, now that we found some exercises, the next step is to build the workouts out. Mhm. Sets, reps, concepts, intensifiers, all the fun stuff. Now that we know what exercises we should be doing for lower lats and how to put together a back workout cuz you train back every 5 days. So, in a sense, we could have two different back workouts, different focuses within those five days and continue to build, which is also the super fun part. All right, so that's the video. I hope you guys I hope you guys learned something. That is the whole purpose of everything. I mean, that's that's why I put this YouTube channel together the way I do. It's supposed to be fun. It's supposed to be entertaining, but you're also supposed to gain some information. And I have like Look, I'm It's drastic in the video. I know it is. I know. been diagnosed. I got like old man mature

[76:55] muscle and I'm like a like oh my lower back hurts from this. I'm like yeah cuz you're yacked out right now. Yeah. Young Tai Code notebook for Ax and Sledge All-American Rough Neck just work. Just work. Pride foods. Pride foods. Pride foods is good. The carrot cake did the carrot cake. The new carrot cake with uh vanilla farm fudge. Yeah. Was really good. The amount of cream of rice I've eaten this offseason is disgusting actually. Glad I have a sponsor for that. Yeah, I am. Um, also you're coaching people now, too. Yes, I am. So, um, if anybody's interested, just, uh, hit me up on Instagram. There's a link in my bio. Uh, free consultation call. We'll get on a call and hook you up. You're going to grow. You're going to do great. Everybody, hope you learned something. Warm it up. Give her a good SL. A, that wasn't good. That thick ass of yours. What do they call them? They call them gats. Now, that's I hate saying this. This sucks. My daughter's like, "What do I do to get a bigger butt?" I'm like, "God damn it. my life. It's not good." Feel like you don't do anything. Nothing. Flat

[77:57] ass. That's what we want. Cardio. Have a good day, everybody.
