TITLE: Foundation Moves
SOURCE: Georges St-Pierre RUSHFIT — DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Foundation Moves.mp4
RELEASE YEAR: 2010
DURATION: 46:34
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] Hi everyone, I'm Georges St-Pierre with Eric Owings and we are here today to explain to you the Rush Fit Foundation movements. The foundation movements are, well, they're our foundation. So we don't want to just rush through this segment and think that these movements aren't necessary and you just want to hop into the workouts. It's actually very important that you spend time focusing on these basic foundation movements and then go into the workouts. If you've mastered the movements in this segment, you're going to find that you're going to be able to perform everything with ease, well not with ease, but with competency. And by doing that, you're going to be able to progress and reach your fitness goals, whatever they may be. So it's very important you take time, you watch, you learn, and then you spend time mastering them. You don't need to use a lot of weight. Some of the movements are just body weights. Some require dumbbells, but it's going to be very important that you take your time and that you make sure that your body's in proper alignment. Pay attention throughout the concept of core activation, the concept of good posture, of

[01:04] doing everything with correct form, minimal amount of weight, and then add weight as you feel necessary. If you do these movements correctly, you're going to find understanding the future DVDs or you're going to be a piece of cake. We all train for different purposes, but make sure we get those movements right. Okay, everybody, let's talk a little bit about the squat. The squat's one of the most fundamental motions that you're ever going to do an exercise and fighting and anything. I think almost everything that you do almost always has a component of changing your level up and down. Whether a person says level change, whether they say shoot, sprawl, whatever it is you're doing almost always, there's a little bit of a bend here. We want to develop this to the fullest capability. That's why we include squatting. You see a lot of squatting in this program. In the beginning, you might notice that your range of motion is not so good, but eventually it will increase as long as you take your time and work within your own limits.

[02:05] Eventually you want to get to what is considered full range of motion, which is a parallel thigh to the ground and an upright posture. If you notice when George comes down, George, if you can, squat down and hold the squat here, if you notice George is pretty much settling into his heels. His knees aren't far past his toes and he's sitting back like he's sitting down into a chair. Then he comes back up in the standing. Yes. I'm going to do a few reps, George. Let everybody see you're doing the reps and hold again at the bottom, George, if you can. Come back down. Good. Yeah, right there. Like I said, if you notice parallel thigh and then he starts to come up. Now if necessary, the modification, if you're having a tough time, or you can stop, George, is going to be just to go a little bit more shallow. But what we don't want to see is we don't want to see the knees buckling in. This is a definite no-no. We want the knees coming out. If necessary, you can widen your stance a little bit. So you don't want a narrow stance, remember, shoulder width, toes are slightly to the outside, just a little bit. We're not going really wide, just a little bit to the outside. What you want to do is your arms come up as you sit back.

[03:06] You have to sit back. Imagine you're sitting into a chair. And if you're having a tough time, you can always put a chair behind you. But if you find that even you lose control, like you get here and you almost fall over, you fall back, that's totally okay. What you want to do there is you want us to go a little bit more shallow than stand and eventually work your depth down until you get the parallel. So we're going to do a couple more, George. Everybody see the full range of motion? Yep. Then up. One more. This is a motion that, okay, George, you can relax. For George, this is extremely important for any fighter, for any athlete, for anybody almost, is the ability to go up and down with control of the core, with complete stabilization here in the body, being able to maintain this here, all the way down to there. This is an essential motion for life, no matter whether you're fighting or just going about your daily routine. Absolutely. It's a movement pattern that happens every minute of every fight. And that's the squat.

[04:15] The lunge is one of the most essential motions probably next to the squat. It's a little bit more complex. So there's a few more things we have to pay attention to. The squat, for most people, is a basic movement. Whereas lunging, we're actually going forward to the side, backwards, or crossing behind. There's basically four ways that we're going to do this. So George, if you can go in all four directions, let's go two to the front, then two side to the side. The knee doesn't touch the ground when you go in the front. And backwards. You see, my knee doesn't touch the ground. And the cross back variation. There we go, side to side. So we try four different variations. Because even though George has a good range of motion here, he's doing everything the proper way. And George, if I can, if I can just have you stop for a second and go out there into the lunge and lower down. And you can lower down. George is going to let his knee touch here just to relax his leg muscles.

[05:15] But normally he's not going to let his leg touch. If anything, you're just going to kiss the ground. It's just going to touch and come back up. Now if you notice here, George, although he comes out, he comes forward, he's not driving his knee forward. He actually steps. He takes a natural step forward. And then he just sinks his weight down into his heel. That's very important. What we don't want happening is this. And then I keep going forward. And I feel a stretch here. Like this is like a tearing sensation. Also this puts a lot of stress on the knee. So I want to keep my foot on the ground. And then as I take this natural step forward, I go here. Then I just lower down. Okay. We want to maintain good posture. Sometimes we include a touchdown. That's totally acceptable. And the same thing. Now if we come up, George, if we go to the side, notice how the knee doesn't go forward. You actually sit back. You sit back under your heels. And the arms act as a counterbalance here. Or you can touch down. If we move backwards, that's good. And if we go backwards here, same thing. We go back and then I sink down into the heel of the front leg. And if I go to the transverse of the crossback lunge, I come here.

[06:18] My front leg, I sink down into the heel and up. Now each one of these lunges, we go in different directions because well our body can move in different directions. We don't develop strength in just one range of motion. We want a variety of movement patterns that give us more balance throughout our body. And would you say this is pretty similar to what you do when you take someone down when you shoot them for a take down? Absolutely. Not only I would say the take down, the changing level, the footwork. Even the most basic stuff that we do in mixed martial art. We use lunges in a certain way. And you'll find at home, say if you have a hard time going all the way out into this position. You lose your balance and have enough tough time. The best thing to do here is go a little bit wider with your stance. Take a natural step forward and then you're just going to do what we call a split squat. So it's a variation. We're not lunging, we actually stay in stance. So you can stay in stance and just touch down or just stay up here and you come up. And if you find you have to restrict your range of motion a bit, that's totally acceptable. But what you don't want to do is come out here where you feel like you're falling and

[07:21] your knees are shaking and you're losing balance. So same thing with the lateral lunge. If I had to just stay here, I can do a stationary movement and restrict the range of motion a bit. But you want to try to get to where you do the full range of motion and include the movement patterns. But if you have to, you can stay stationary. Do say five reps, ten reps, how many areas necessary from a stationary position. Then you switch, come into a stationary position and it'll look just like this. That's the modification if you're having a tough time. And that's the lunge. The pushup is one of the most basic upper body exercises we can do. It requires no equipment and you can almost do it in any space. If you just have a tiny little space in your living room, your bedroom, wherever, you can always do some pushups. Now the key to a pushup is maintaining good alignment of the body. So I should almost be able to transfer the same exact stance that you see here standing right to the ground. We don't want to be caved in here but too high.

[08:22] We want to think about almost a line that forms if you do it straight through the body, your ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Once the deviations start to occur, that shows that your core stability is now malfunctioning and you're going to have to make a modification. We'll show some modifications but let's first take a look at how it's performed correctly. George, let's go ahead and do a couple pushups here. Just a normal standard pushup. Notice how George has a great alignment here with his body. It's straight through and that's because George has a strong core. By having a strong core, he's able to maintain that position. Now George can do a variety of pushups here. Let's do some knuckle pushups, George. So by changing his grip, he changes the angle and the angle changes which muscles are working and he can work different parts of his body just by changing the way that his hands are placed. He can go narrower or wide with his grips. He can go up on his knuckles that requires more wrist stability. Pushups have a lot of variations. They have a lot of stuff you can do. Let's show a plyo pushup here. This is an explosive pushup. So it's the same movement but just performed differently.

[09:23] Okay, great. And go and relax. So that's basically a perfect pushup. Now if you're having a tough time and you find, like I said, I come into this position and I get up here and I start doing this or my head starts coming down. I start breaking my form. The best modification you can make when that starts happening is maybe let's say I start off strong. I do five pushups. But then my range of motion starts to get shorter. My neck starts to lead down. My hips start to sag. I want to try to maintain this alignment. And then it's lowered down to my knees. From here I continue on how I was doing just off my knees. That makes the resistance much less and I'm able to do it. If I find that even this, I start to sag and I start to break down. Then what I want to do is I just want to lower back, take a break, come back into alignment. You notice that means my shoulders are over my hands, my head's in place, and it's my arms that are bending. I'm stabilizing my body with my core. Eric, is that fair to say that the pushup also basically works the core and all the

[10:29] body at the same time, it's not only the arm? Yeah, well George, it's funny that you asked that because the thing about the pushup is that it's predominantly a core exercise. And remember guys, core is beyond just abdominals. It's pretty much everything that's stabilizing with the body. So just maintaining the pushup position is actually quite difficult. Someone just tries to maintain this in good alignment for one minute, they'll start to fatigue. And what we're doing is we're adding on the arm exercise to it. So just don't think of a pushup as only a pushing exercise. Think about it as a total body exercise. And that's kind of like the whole thing that we're getting at in functional training because for fighting you have to be able to use your whole body at one time and in life pretty much you have to. Yeah, that's a variation where George is a scapular retraction and now he's working the backside of his body. All right, great job. And that's the pushup. The sit-up is a very basic motion that I think everybody's probably done once or twice in

[11:31] their life. Whether we even realize, sometimes we just sit up out of our bed so we, spinal flexion is really what we can call this, okay? What we're doing when we do a sit-up is we're trying to use the abdominals, actually use our neck flexors here too. So pretty much think of the spine is not just here in this little area, right? It's the whole entire spinal column and it's the idea of bringing everything forward. So that idea of flexion is a very essential movement pattern. One of the easiest ways to train this is by doing a sit-up. And you'll see this in the warm-up. So George is going to come up where George starts to raise up in the air. Good. Now as you lie down, let's bend the knees and do a traditional sit-up. Now where you take your elbows down towards your hips and you sit all the way up, just widen your feet out a little bit if you can, George. Good. And these are all good variations. Now you'll find that throughout a fight you probably sit up quite a bit, right? Absolutely. I mean, where you have to get up off the ground if you can take it down? Absolutely, on the ground and also standing up I think just a basic punch, sometimes you

[12:31] need to crunch down. Yeah, kind of cover. That's when the abdominal comes into play. And remember, anything like this, this is spinal flexion and this is going to require the abdominal muscles to contract. Now we can overload this pattern by putting a weight in your hands. Just using your body weight sometimes is enough. So there's a lot of variety in how to do this. And you'll find that sometimes for some people a full sit-up can be sort of like jarring on the spine sometimes you have difficulty with that. If that happens to be the case, there's nothing wrong with just doing an abdominal crunch variation. The key thing is we don't want to yank the head forward. We just want to kind of put our fingers here or we can even cross over here. And when we do this, we just bring the shoulder blades off the ground and lower it out. So this is a modification for people who might find the full sit-up to be difficult. You can always do a partial motion. Then eventually as you get stronger, work yourself into a full range of motion. And that's the sit-up. Now we're going to talk about back extension.

[13:34] Back extension is something that it's very important actually in everything in life. All these exercises that we're doing are extremely important, but this is one of those things that if we don't have our extensor, basically the erector muscles of the spine, we're going to collapse. We're going to develop a posture like this. And posture like this is not really good for anything in life, but especially not for fighting, right? It's not really good for fighting when it seems you have to have good posture. Exactly. Plus it's going to make you have injuries. You know, it's not going to keep your body healthy. It's very important to have a good posture, keep your body healthy and stay injury free. Now George is just going to show a variation of the back extension. And so you can lower it down here George. You can do the more difficult one and that's this. That's the opposite. But you can also just do it off the knees too. So if George goes down, if you notice when he gets up here, so yeah, he's got to activate all this. There's more to do than just back extension. That's glute activation. Now here he's pretty much extending throughout the spine. He's working all these muscles. Now the glutes work here too. And this is one of the kneeling opposites or the prone position opposites is an advanced

[14:36] form of back extension with also glute activation and various other things. Now when he goes down, this is pretty much showing I think back extension in a more pure form although we are also encompassing pretty much everything here on the posterior chain. And George if you can tilt your chin in. What's happening here is pretty much contracting from head to toe all the way down his spine all the way throughout. And as you can go and relax down George. So this is one of those movements that although it appears simple, it's actually quite difficult. I mean you'll find that like if you put this into the circuits and you're just doing this exercise on a daily basis, whenever you do that isometric contraction what happens is you just basically the lactic acid starts building up throughout the body. But as you do it more and more you start to develop a tolerance to it and you get stronger and you actually develop better posture where you can stay upright or perform a take down more efficiently or a guard pass more efficiently. Now we're going to show a modification here. If you're having a tough time doing the full extension with all four limbs off the ground what George is going to do is put his head down on the ground and he's going to go one

[15:36] then over to his other hand, two to his leg now, three and then to his other one, four. You can try to hold each one for about five seconds and eventually you can try to do the line opposites. So George let's go opposite leg, opposite arm and you can go side to side like that. Now if you've done the opposites and you've been able to complete you know going side to side now let's try doing everything together. You do all four limbs off the ground so you raise up George, try to raise the legs off and what George is trying to do is get everything just pretty much keeping just as abdominals and his thighs on the ground and take everything else off the ground which causes everything on his back to have to contract and that's going to give him good back extension and good posture and that's the back extension. Now let's talk about rotation. You'll find in this program there's a lot of movements that requires to rotate moving our shoulders around our spine. This is a consistent thing you'll find pretty much throughout fighting too right.

[16:37] I mean to throw a punch, to throw a kick, to almost do any type of judo style takedown there's almost always a rotational component. Absolutely it's a natural movement pattern of the body. You can see this in every movement, every technique and mixed martial art. And you'll find though as we're doing these rotation movements sometimes we take a pose where we're just moving our shoulders around our spine but our spine pretty much stays looking straight ahead. Sometimes we'll follow so you'll notice if George now is following. Now George let's shorten up your range of motion but let's stay looking straight ahead with no movement from the head whatsoever just your shoulders moving around and these are both acceptable forms of rotation. Now you also notice if George is what we call a prone rotation from down in the push up position just opening and closing. You don't have to even pause that long just pause for about a second so George is going to rotate there again he's rotating around and down go to the other side going side to side and there's also another form of rotation here that you'll see actually there's various forms. You'll notice this is a consistent theme and you just want to be aware that it's not to over do it. Don't try to over rotate let your natural range of motion sort of dictate that.

[17:40] You start with going with a restricted range of motion and gradually building up to where you feel like you're reaching those outer limits then that's where you want to stop. You don't want to go too far. And George let's just show the Kimoura sit up. This is another sit up that you'll see throughout and notice how he's rotating as he comes up. So here again we're almost combining the movement pattern spinal flexion with rotation and that's one of the things you're going to notice throughout the program is that there's a lot of rotation going on. One of the key things though is to make sure that you have your core activated meaning that your muscles aren't loose and your spine is not really loose. You want to make sure everything is strong and stabilized that way as you're rotating you're not going to hurt yourself. That's very important. That's also something we're going to talk about is the concept of core activation but for right now that covers rotation. Now let's talk a little bit about core activation. Core activation is one of those things that it's actually very complex if you want to talk about it because you can pretty much we can get into the beta on what part of the

[18:43] core are we talking about. We're talking about the core of the knee and the intrinsic stabilizers inside the knee or whatever little joint. But a consistent thing we're talking about the stabilization of our midsection of the spine. That's where you're going to hear core activation throughout and you're going to pretty much every exercise that we do it has to be done first. We have to activate the core before we squat. We don't want to have a loose core because then everything tumbles in so we always have to keep the body active. One of the best examples is the simplest way I can explain this and for George and for everybody at home if I were to be in front of George I'm going to punch him as hard as I can in the stomach. So say if you're in a square stance George and you were to activate your core you're going to brace for this punch. Of course you do. Exactly. Now you saw what happened there. We're going to do it again. He braces now everything here tightens up. That's the transverse abdominis muscle. It's kind of like this little girdle that's tightening everything up. It's activating your diaphragm, your rectus abdominis, all of these muscles around here. Everything's doing its job to keep the spine in place. So in this case you can brace for a punch but also if you were to lift a heavy weight

[19:45] you'll find almost any movement that you do that's going to become what you do before you do your movement. Whether you're going to take off running, whether you're going to throw a punch, whether you're going to throw a kick, whether you're going to do a power clean or a squat or anything you're always going to have core activation. Let's just show one more example here with George. Let's go down into the plank position. This is one of those ones that you can kind of almost test if your core is activating just by holding this. Now George's core is activating. We know this because of the alignment. We have ear, shoulder, hip. Everything here is nice and tight and George's he's contracted throughout. One thing you'll notice here is that his body's not moving out. Although George is breathing, he's definitely, oxygen is going in off his body. He's not losing the core activation. This is very essential. You don't want to start breathing, let your body collapse as you're breathing. You want to keep everything in place. If you can, you try to breathe into the back of the lungs as you're there. Try not to just breathe real shallow. Try to breathe natural, but it's going to be a little bit more difficult because this is all contracting. This is restricting the movement of your ribs a little bit, but you'll still be able to

[20:48] breathe into the back. That's the whole idea. Breathe naturally, yet keep the muscles activated. It's a very important concept that not only for our program, but just for life in general. If you're ever going to pick anything up, if you're ever going to do any activity, this can help you. That covers the basics of core activation. Now let's talk about the burpee. The burpee is, in my opinion, it's one of those motions that probably best simulates the energetics of a fight. If you do it with an explosive nature and you really go after it, you can get a very intense workout in less than a minute. If you just do as many as you can. It's one of those things because there's so much muscle being used and there's so much movement involved that this really accelerates the metabolism and it works pretty much every muscle throughout the body. Let's go ahead and have you show a few burpees, George, just in full speed. Let's do three of them. If you notice, we have almost all those components we talked about.

[21:51] We have, okay, you can go and relax. We have squatting. We have sort of almost like a lunge. We have a plank position. We have core activation. We have jumping. We have a push-up. We have flexion of the spine. We have so much movement going on here. For some people, this, we're actually for almost everybody, this is a difficult exercise. Absolutely. It's raised a hard rate. It's also pretty similar to a sprawl motion too, right? Like somewhere to try to take you down. It's almost like you're sprawling. You can say it's like a sprawl and also could be following by a takedown. The same push that you find during a takedown, it's the same push that you use when you come up. There's a lot of functional transfer. If you want to use that word, that's actually a great way to describe it. There's functional transfer from this movement into what George does or what most athletes do. Now, for some people, the most difficult part might be the squat thrust. Let's just show the squat thrust component, George, where you just jump back and jump up, okay? Now, if you have a hard time doing that, because George is a strong person and he has good

[22:52] coordination, for some people that might be a little bit too much in the beginning and the jump at the top. What I'm going to suggest as a modification if you're having a tough time doing the squat thrust, because you see squat thrust and burpees throughout the program, is I suggest you do this and sprawling. This is a great substitution for squat thrust, burpees, and sprawling motions throughout. What I like to see you do is this. You just basically come down and try to get your hands onto the ground. You're going to step back with one foot, back with the other, back with the foot, back here, and then stand. That's a fine substitution. You'll find when you get used to it, you can build up speed and then eventually you can get into the full motion where you hop back and you hop up. That covers the burpee and the squat thrust. Now, we're going to talk a little bit about addressing the dumbbells. What I mean by that is how we pick the dumbbell up off the ground. My recommendation for almost anybody, I even do this myself when I train, is to set up

[23:54] my dumbbells on something about anywhere between knee to waist height. I prefer a chair or a table or if I'm at a gym, I prefer the rack itself. The reason being is we don't want to come up to our dumbbells and try to pick them up like this. Now, throughout the program, you might notice, because we're doing real workouts, you might notice that that happens. You might notice people set their dumbbells down. They are bent in the spine. That's a contradiction. What happens when you have a strong core, you can get away with it. If I do this to you right now, I'm technically in bad posture and look, I just did it the wrong way. That's because I have a strong core. I'm able to do that. If I'm deconditioned, then I do this type of motion and I can hurt myself. That's very important to realize that just because you can get away with it, you should try not to. You should always make it your objective to do everything the correct way. As you get stronger and stronger, you can make a mistake, but to do it the correct way, this is what George is going to show now. This is how we want you to come down if you're going to pick your dumbbells up off the ground. Notice how his back is in a strong, flat, neutral position. That means his core is activated. Now if you go up and you set your dumbbells back down, George, same thing.

[24:55] Notice he whitens out his stance a little bit. Then he drops them down, strong position. That's how you address the dumbbell. The dumbbell squat is very similar to the squat that we learned for just basic bodyweight squatting. It's the same mechanics. The only difference is that now we have resistance at it. George is going to come up, address the dumbbells. He's going to step back and he's going to set his stance at the shoulder width apart. The toes can point slightly outward, but for the most part, his legs are straight ahead. With his dumbbells by his side, he's just going to squat down and then come back up. Notice how the dumbbells move a little bit out the way. Good posture. Try to get his thighs down to parallel each time. Good. Now George, if you can, let's clean them up. This is what we call a front squat. It's pretty much the same thing. Notice how he lowers down and drives up. The weights stay high, pushing the elbows forward. Notice how he gets down deep. It's the same thing. There's two basic variations that we're looking at doing.

[25:58] That's our basic squat with our dumbbells to the side. With our dumbbells up, the front squat variation. These both, basically what we're doing is the same type of squatting motion. Like I said, the same mechanics. We're sitting back into that chair. The knees aren't going too far forward. We're activating all the leg muscles, the core muscles, everything throughout. Just make sure your leg is very strong. Keep everything straight. That's the dumbbell squat. The dumbbell lunge is essentially the same lunge that we learned before, except now we're just adding resistance. The most common way that we're adding resistance is just by holding the weights down by our side, starting off George's feet together. Let's do all four directions. Let's go forward. Then we'll go with our lateral lunge to the side. Excellent. Let's go backwards now. We'll do our cross-back lunge. Those are four directions. You'll notice that each one's a little bit different, but yet it's pretty much similar.

[27:01] Let's go back out to the forward lunge again one more time though. Notice when George comes down here, when he lunges. George lowered his knee down because that's what I'm showing you guys. If he holds that there, it actually becomes excruciatingly painful. He's taking a little break down here, but normally his knee would not be on the ground. He's just going to be here for a momentary pause and he comes back. The key thing here though is actually how he's putting the weight onto his foot. His weight's not going onto the ball, his foot and his toes, and his knee's not projecting forward. He just steps forward and he lowers down into the heel. 90 degrees. Yeah, exactly. Get that thigh to parallel, then come right back up into standing, pushing off the ball of the foot. There he is. He's back into his position. Forward and backwards. You can go multi-directions. Now do you like doing multi-direction lunges, George? I like it because when I'm fighting in every day of life, you know, you're going multi-direction. So it's important that your training reflects what you will perform. And that's the dumbbell lunge.

[28:09] The dumbbell standing press is one of the best strength-building exercises that we have for the upper body. What happens here is we want to maintain, first of all, let's go bring the dumbbells up, George, to the rack position. This is what we call the rack position, okay? Meaning that we have them racked up top here. Now very important here is that we don't want George extending out the spine. We actually want core activation. We want that key theme. We want to keep everything here in place. And then George, let's just press them straight up with your palms facing. That's a basic standing press. Now let's do another repetition with a rotation. That's also an acceptable form of pressing. Yeah, rotating at the bottom. And now let's do a push press, which is an explosive form. Good. Let's do that one more time, George. So standing press, now a basic standing press. Just straight up. Good. Then rotating. And then the push press, where if you notice, he looks down as he presses up. The reason why he doesn't, you can even do that in your regular presses too if you just want to develop this habit. What George is doing when he does this, he's clearing out more space back here in between his scapula, so he can actually get better extension on his arms when he does this. When I look down, I say, but I don't want to stay looking down.

[29:10] As I lower it down, I'll look up. Another thing is, you notice George, he's not doing this. He's not sticking his chest out to try to get his chest involved in all these other muscles. He's maintaining good core alignment, which actually makes him a better athlete. It keeps him safe and it gives him real functional strength. It's not an artificial form of strength that we're doing here. He's actually keeping his body in the alignment that it should be in. And then he's using the weight that actually suits his body. So remember, don't try to use a bunch of weight here. Don't let your ego get involved in the lift. Try to use just what you can use with good form. Get quality over quantity. Yes. That's one of the most important concepts you're going to have. Quality over quantity. And if you get used to doing that, you'll find that eventually the weight will increase. And so with this one, just be, let it go, gradually. A lot of times we get our egos attached to the pressing motions. Like, how much do you bench press? Would you say that that's really even relevant in a fight? How much do you bench press? It doesn't make any difference. So one more thing here, just on the press before we wrap it up here, is that when you

[30:11] do the push press, remember, that's an advanced variation. When we do this, this requires a little bit more explosion. We're using the legs. We're popping the hips. If any motion, if you find that it's a little bit too ballistic, that you maybe don't feel comfortable doing it, it's totally fine to substitute just a standard press. And that's where we just come up and down or even looking straight ahead. Very basic. So you don't have to do the push press unless you feel you're ready for that. And that's the basics of the dumbbell standing press. Okay, now let's talk about the dumbbell row. I consider the dumbbell row to be sort of like the yin to the yang or the yang to the yin to the standing press. It's sort of like the balancing out motion. And it's a very important motion because we don't really get any type of pulling motion with our body weight exercises. So we want to make sure that we include a pulling motion with the dumbbells. The important thing here is you can notice when George comes down, let's go ahead and do a couple of stationary rows there, George. Good. One. Let's do three here.

[31:11] And three. And you can come back in the standing. Now, if you notice when George, when he does his row, he sits back with his hips this way, onto his heels with his chest over spine. He does not round. He keeps the back in a nice, strong, neutral position there. You remember the concept, core activation. It stays throughout. Okay, so the core has to activate. I sit back here. And then I'm in good position. Now, this is a very important motion. So we have to remember we try to pour elbows back and we're pulling with our elbows. That activates our lats, our rhomboids, our traps. All of these muscles that make our backs very strong and allow us to do this motion, we have to use those. The biceps, the forearms, everything here, it is activating as well. But remember we want to pull with the elbow. Now, George, let's show a rotational row. This is where he's actually going side to side. And let's go and get some spinal rotation going on there. Good. If you notice it's the same motion. Now he's just alternating arms, but still the same strong back position. The core is activated and he's moving the elbows around the spine. And George, now let's go and go down into the prone position.

[32:12] Oh, no. Okay. Actually, I'm going to grab one of these and just do a one arm, one leg row. Yeah, let's check that out. Now he's doing the same type of row, but now he's on, it's much more, this is an advanced variation. Now, if George wanted to modify this because, say, balance were an issue, let's say you're having a hard time doing that, George put your foot down. They're going to try to stay bent over. Good. And row. And you could even brace now, brace your hand in your knee there too, George. Yeah, that gives him more stability. Okay. So that's an easier modification when you see a one arm, one leg row. And let's do one prone row, George. So put the dumbbells down here in front of you and out into this position. And we're just going to go side to side a few times. So now he's in that pushup type position and notice he's pulling, he sets the weight down. He's going side to side. My core is working as well. Yeah. This is activating his core to the extreme. Now what we want here, George, let's lower down to the knees. Let's say George fatigues and he wants to continue on rowing, but his core got, it's gotten tired. This is a great modification to make. If you find that that type of prone row becomes too difficult, you can always lower down to

[33:14] your knees. That makes it a little bit easier on the core and you can still get that rowing motion in, which is a very important motion. And that's the basics of the dumbbell row. Now, let's talk about the exercise upright rowing or high pulling and or I should say because they're not exactly the same, but it's a similar movement pattern. Let's first look at the upright row. You'll notice this is a movement throughout. Now the upright row is basically George in just a natural stack position, stacked meaning ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle, nice natural posture. He's using the trapezius muscles, the deltoids, the biceps, everything here and he's pulling upward. Notice how the elbow comes up higher than the wrist and he's just activating all that, pulling up. Now that's our basic movement pattern. Now George is going to do a little bit more advanced. George, you can actually just use one. You don't have to even use two here. Now let's do a high pull. Now the difference with the high pull is this is leading into the Olympic lifts. He's using his legs.

[34:15] He's popping his hip, driving with his legs and then using that to help pop it up and it's more of a leg exercise and the arms are just activating towards the top. They're both great variations and if you notice that the high pull is a little bit complicated, you can always substitute back with our basic that you saw there, which is just the upright row, whether it's with one dumbbell or with two dumbbells and then if you feel comfortable, we use our legs. And you may notice, hey George, can we do this a couple more times? I just want to show one more thing here when you do it. If you notice when George does this motion, look at his spine. His spine is nice and strong. His core is activated throughout and that allows him to connect his legs to his arms. The actual work is more with the leg than the shoulder actually. Yes. That's kind of like with a punch or a kick too, right? I mean like almost everything you do, it's more from the hips and the coordination. Our legs is the strongest part of our body. Legs are much more stronger than the arms. So that's why we use a leg for everything that we do. That covers the basics of the dumbbell high pull or the upright row.

[35:25] Now we're going to talk about the dumbbell clean or the dumbbell power clean. Olympic lifting in my opinion is what we're all kind of building up to with, you know, with athletic training and weightlifting. I think that's the main value of weight training for a fighter. Would you agree? I agree. And that's one of the reasons why I implement Olympic lifting movement pattern in my training because the Olympic lifters are the most explosive athlete in the world and in my sport I need explosiveness. So George Latam's trains with a barbell but a dumbbell is a fine substitution. Never feel, you know, like just because you don't have a big heavy weight we can't get the same effect. Because when you think about what we're doing, whether it's using a barbell, a kettlebell, a dumbbell, whatever it is, we're essentially doing a jumping motion. This concept of triple extension, extension of the ankle, knee and hip joint like this, that's what people are doing with it. So George, let's go and jump up. Yeah, let's show that a few more times. So that's what it looks like without really jump off the ground and really exaggerate it. And so if you notice what an Olympic lift is essentially we're projecting the weights

[36:27] upward right with this shrug with this type of movement pattern kind of we're jumping up off the ground because we have heavy weights. We don't really jump. A lot of times we stay planted on the ground. Even as I land, I pop my elbows forward and that gets me underneath the weight. So I'm actually putting myself underneath the weight then I stand. We transfer basically, we transfer all our energy in the tools that we have. Either if it's a barbell or a dumbbell in Olympic lifting, they use a barbell. But we're going to transfer all the energy of the movement in our dumbbell. Yes. So let's go and show it a few times with the dumbbell. Let's take a look at the basics here. So the first thing is this there again, we get ourselves in a nice strong position. We notice George will fold over but keeping the back in a strong position. They'll extend up and he does the catch. So there's a couple parts of George. Let's just go and stress just the, yeah, good. And if you notice, let's do it one more time. Excellent. And what he's doing there, you can go and set the dumbbells down, George. He's extending here.

[37:27] Okay. And remember as he's extending, it looks like he's just throwing the weights up. But really what's happening is the weights are projecting upward and as he dips, he punches his elbow forward and he maintains good position here and he squats down. He lands on his heels, then he stands, then he lowers. And if you notice, he's not in a rush. He's not doing this and dropping them down. It's very deliberate and slow because it's the explosiveness that he's trying to capture. He's not just trying to throw the weights around into a bunch of repetitions. He's focusing on good leg drive every time. And another key component to the power clean is coordination. It's very difficult to project a weight in one direction and then drop and switch directions, catch and stabilize. So this is sort of like the epitome of athleticism. Yeah. And when you drop down underneath, it's like a free fall. You have to let your leg just like a free fall. Let everything go. So this is one of those motions that you might find almost too complicated in the beginning.

[38:28] And remember, the best way to practice this with no weight, get used to this motion of sort of jumping, landing and punching your elbows forward. Then eventually try to shorten the jump where it's just this. But in the beginning, if you find this too difficult, let's take a look at a fine substitution here. So if it's not going to be the same muscle energetics, we're going to lose some explosiveness. We're not going to get the same coordination factor, but we're training similar muscles. So if I'm not able to do a power clean yet and I'm practicing just my body weight, I can do this when a power clean and a press or whatever pops up in a push press pops up into the routine. I'm just going to lower down to a squat, stand, curl. So that's a fine substitution for the clean. Now if it calls for a clean and press, I'm going to do the same thing. I'm going to squat, curl and press. So throughout the movements, you might see that throughout the workout, you might see a the need for a clean. There's a substitution. Okay. We squat and we curl. And if it's a clean and push press or a dumbbell power clean with a push press, we're going

[39:28] to come here and press, keeping everything very basic, but still working similar muscles. And that covers the basis of the dumbbell clean. Okay. The dumbbell swing is kind of like a mix. It's a very functional exercise. It's not as explosive or requires much coordination as an Olympic lift, yet you're integrating the legs with an upper body movement. Similar to the high pool, similar to the power clean, you got to think a little bit more simplistic, but it's a great motion. It develops overall athleticism, I think. George, you want to go and pick up a dumbbell and show us how you do it? So you notice George grabs a 30 pound dumbbell, which seems kind of heavy, but it's actually not that bad because he's using his legs. Remember, George is very strong, so you might not be out of 30 yet. You might start with a five pound weight, a 10 pound weight, even just your body weight. Now if you notice George is doing this, he takes a little pause at the top, right? And as he lowers down, his core is activated the whole entire time, and he maintains alignment

[40:32] here. He's not collapsing. If you notice one of the key things here is where you look. So if I stay looking straight ahead, as I lower down, I swing up, my spine stays neutral. If I happen to try to follow the weight, I might overextend at the back and hurt my spine here, and I might injure myself if I try following it down. So don't really look at the weight with this one. Just stay looking straight ahead. Nice natural stance. And if you find that there again, you feel the weights getting out of control, you feel you might hurt your shoulder, you just don't feel comfortable going all the way up, you can always play with the range of motion with this, meaning I can dip a little bit more shallow and I can swing not as high. So a substitution for this will be as I'm here, just barely moving. And then as I feel more comfortable, I can start working my height up, driving my legs down more, to eventually getting into a full swing. The power comes from his legs, not from the shoulder. Don't try to lift the weight with your shoulder. It's all the glute, the core, and the legs.

[41:33] And a key detail to that, if you just want to get that leg drive is when you go down, try to push off the balls of your feet, try to push your heels down to the ground. That activates all of these muscles, and it gives you much more power. And that's where the power comes from, from the hamstrings, from the glutes, from the back. And that covers the basics of the dumbbell swing. Okay now we're going to talk a little bit about the dumbbell get up. We don't have to use a dumbbell, but it's probably the best variation, especially if you're using this at home. Some people old strong used to use barbells, used to use all kinds of big heavy objects, even you could probably even use a human body. Now the thing about the get up, let's go ahead and show it a few times George. It's entirety. If you notice throughout, George is keeping his eyes on the weight the whole time. That's very important. Don't discount that in this thing, he's just doing it for whatever reason. This is one of the most important details you can learn about this whole entire movement.

[42:34] Do not at any time take your eyes off this weight. Don't look at the screen, don't watch us doing it. When you start doing your get ups, the only thing is you and your weight. If you take your eyes off that weight, it's very likely it could definitely happen that this weight could come down and hit you. You don't want to get hit in the head by a dumbbell, especially if you're using 15, 20, 30 pounds or more, it can cause some damage. Absolutely. Now what would you say is the main functional value for you using that movement George? I would say during my fight I use a technique called the hip eyes. Stand back up from when I'm under one of my opponent. So that's pretty much working the same muscles throughout? So it's pretty much the same pattern. And remember to keep the eyes on the dumbbell. The eyes that directed your movement. So when we're going up, keep looking up. Don't look down. Very important, don't look at us on the TV. You might hurt yourself. Now let's go and try to break down what's happening with the get up.

[43:34] We're using no weight here because we're going to have George go very slow. And this is actually a great way to start learning how to use this. No weight in your hand and just looking at the hand that's up. Now let's break down what's happening here throughout. So George's shoulders are working, everything's working. Now his abdominals are working, his obliques are working, the shoulder over here is working. As he comes up, now this is very important. Let's go and stop here now George. As George comes up, notice how he goes in the opposite direction of the arm that's extended. He comes up and his left arm, so if he's holding the weight with his right hand, if he's looking at his right hand, his left arm is the base support here as he comes up. So this takes some of the stress off the body and it gives it throughout the structure. Let's stay here for a second George, let's come back down. I want to stress leg position. So you notice that when George came up here, the arm that's the post arm, being his left arm is the same leg that's been, this is the same position. We do this on purpose when we do our training because this is what we call the staggered butterfly guard or staggered hooks guard. He's doing this as a very functional transfer into the body.

[44:34] Now at this point George has to notice how this knee is up in the air, okay, his foot's down. And he decides to make his move and come up in the stand. He's going to hip-heist up, meaning he's going to turn his hips up, yeah, and he gets his knee on the ground. And now as he comes up in the stand, he just drives upward. As he lowers back down, he sets his knee onto the ground and he reverses the whole motion. Notice how as he steps, yeah, let's come back here real quick George, let's come up. Yeah, notice how when he comes down, he lets his foot flip around and his left arm post onto the ground, then he lowers down elbow onto the elbow, then he goes down to the shoulder, then he lets his leg straighten all the way back out. So as you can see, there's a lot of movement going on and you can't discredit anyone move. You have to make sure that each one's done correctly. So it's very important, this is the most difficult part for people, is this as I'm here is getting this knee back and as a base of support, I want to get it underneath my hip. It's very important as I'm doing this that I don't keep my knee too narrow because then I'll collapse as I try to come up.

[45:34] So if you find that you can just get to here in this spot, all you feel comfortable with is that's a half get up and that is a fine substitution. So if necessary, you can come up just to the halfway post. Let's do a half get up George. You notice the description is a little bit longer because we want to be sure that you're doing this correctly. This is a very important motion. So as he comes up, you start to drive up and sit all the way up into the post position, there we go. Now that's a half get up. Let's slide back down George, so you go down elbow, shoulder, line straight and then back up again, a half get up. Now if you notice now here, now if he's going to do the full get up, he's basically going to pull his left leg back underneath of him. There you go. Seconds of a base support, he's going to turn straight up the body, come fully in the standing and then it really reverses the motion. That's a full get up. He's going to come back down to the knee, fold the left leg in, post the left arm, then lower down, elbow, shoulder, flat on the ground. And that covers the dumbbell get up.
