TITLE: Full Body Strength and Conditioning
SOURCE: Georges St-Pierre RUSHFIT — DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Rushfit Full Body Strength and Conditioning Dvd.avi
RELEASE YEAR: 2010
DURATION: 1:39:57
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] If you want to be a champion, you need to train like one. I'm Josh St. Pierre. Welcome to the full body strength and conditioning workout. This is pretty much combining all the major movements. We're producing every muscle in the human body here.

[01:01] I'm in pain right now, but I know that's what I need. That's what I need to get in shape. This is your chance to train with me, Josh St. Pierre. Hi everyone, I'm Josh St. Pierre. Welcome to my Rush Fit Warmup. This program has been designed by Eric Owens. The Rush Fit Warmup is a multifaceted warmup that uses only body weight motions and allows you to work every muscle of your body in a functional manner to get you ready for the work to come and the rounds. Let's not waste too much time.

[02:02] Let's get started with a shoulder width stance and do some torso twists. As you notice, I want to get my elbows up about shoulder height. I can dip down a little bit. That's okay. I pick a good pivot point on the ground. I want to rotate back and forth. Imagine that my elbows, if there's a line, just going about 180 degrees. If there's a sphere here, I don't want to go too far. I don't want to go all the way around here. I don't want to injure myself. Remember, we're just warming up. We're trying to get the body loose, core temperature up so we don't injure ourselves. And we're ready for the work to come. The body is like an elastic. If you try to stress an elastic when it's cold, it's going to snap. If you try to stretch it when it's warm, now you're going to be able to feel it. We're doing each exercise for 60 seconds. Right now we have about 10 seconds left. Then we're going to switch and go into our next exercise, which is a side bend. Let's keep going, though, guys. We have about 5 seconds.

[03:04] All right, good job. Now here, in our stance, we're just going to lean to one side, kicking our hip out, reaching over, then going to the other side. This is a side bend, and what we don't want to do is we don't want to bend forward and then over. We want to keep our body stacked, meaning knee, hip, shoulder, everything in alignment. We let the hip kick out to the side and we reach. This is going to be stretching the muscles of the hips and of the lats. And this is a very important movement pattern in most functional fitness and in fighting. You have to be able to move side to side as well as forward and backwards. Like every other exercise, you start slowly and you try to pick it up as time goes on. Now we have about 20 seconds left in this. You can also work at your own rate. If you find you're starting to fatigue, the form is starting to go away. Step back, maybe take a few deep breaths and get back at it. 10 more seconds, guys. Warm up is very important. It prevents injuries and it allows us to have our full range of motion. Okay, great job.

[04:05] Now let's turn and face this direction and we're going to come down onto our fingers, walking out into the plank position. We're going to walk our feet up to our hands. You just turn, switch directions and go back in the other direction. This is a great way to stretch all the muscles on the backside of the body. We're also activating the core. We're starting to get things a little bit, the difficulties increasing here now. You might find that your body temperature is increasing. That's good. You should be starting to sweat. Probably around this point, maybe within a couple more exercises, the difficulty, the complexity is going to increase. One of the things you might notice, so Victoria, if you can, let's do a bent knee modification. Victoria happens to have great flexibility, but if her flexibility wasn't so good, she's going to come up like this. She's going to tuck under and she's going to lower down with a bent knee position. That's going to allow her to get down there on the ground, walk herself out. She walks her feet up. She'll also do it in a bent knee position. Great job, Victoria. About five more seconds, guys. Let's try to get one more.

[05:05] Up in standing, we're going to take a move from Capoedo. We're going to do the ginga. We're going to go side to side. It's like a backward lunge. We bring one hand in front, so either your defending hand up a little bit higher towards you, come up in front of the face. We'll go side to side. This is a great move. The Valsaluiti. Basically, it's a backward lunge. We go side to side and Capoedo has some very effective techniques. This is when the base moves up Capoedo. I'm sure none of us are very good at it, but it's still a fun exercise and it's a great variation of a lunge. Quebrera, it's a martial art from Brazil. It's also a style of dancing. This is one of their base motions. It's a great way to warm up with the body. Moving back and forth, we have the coordination here. We're lunging back with one leg and then back with the other. About 10 more seconds to go here and then we're going to do our walkout push-up. So, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. Okay, now here, shoulder with stance.

[06:06] We're going to lower down squatting. We're going to walk out to the full push-up position. Hands underneath the shoulders, lower down, then come back up. Try to stress getting a full range of motion here. So, you squat all the way down, get your hands on the ground, you walk out. You get your hands underneath your shoulders. You don't want them far back, you don't want them too far forward. A good alignment, lower down, chest to the deck, press all the way up, then back in the standing. Okay, now we're about halfway into it guys, so 30 more seconds. And you'll notice as when they come back up into the standing position, we want to make sure our heels get on the ground before we stand up. And let's check out Victoria's former. So, if you start to fatigue a little bit, it's okay to lower down your knees. It's also okay to restrict your range of motion if necessary. If you can't lower all the way down, what you don't want to have happen is lead with your head or collapse in the core. You want to keep the core activated at all times, maintain good alignment, ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Okay, now back in the standing guys, we're going to come here, feet together and lateral lunges going side to side.

[07:12] Try to imagine your feet are running on parallel lines here. We don't want our toes pointing too far out or too far in. When we take our step out too, we want to sit back into our heel. Notice how the trail leg stays straight, the lead leg is the leg that bends. The hands raise up as a counterbalance, and that's also activating the muscles in the shoulders. Giving us a full body warm up. Remember, functional training is about using all muscles of the body, not just one or two. Halfway there guys. If you notice, they're not working at a breakneck speed. The speed is enough to make sure that they're working, but yet this isn't really a workout yet, this is a warm up. We're just getting the body warm and loose. If you're finding you're out of breath and you're about to pass out, you probably need to slow down a little bit and do a little bit less repetitions. Find your own speed and figure out what works for you. It's important to make the blood circulate everywhere in every muscle and every joint of our body to prevent injuries. Very important. Now we're in our stance, let's lower it down.

[08:13] We're going to walk out and we're going to do our push up with a lateral hold here. We're going to come up a lateral plank. We lower it down to the push up and back out. Let's get on it. Walk out and once you get out into that push up position, you're going to maintain that push up position. They're all the way down, you open up, you rotate. Notice how they rotate on their feet completely. They rotate. Now after they hold a 5 second hold, they lower back down. Good. And if you find that a 5 second hold is not really challenging, try to hold it 10 seconds. Try to hold 20 seconds. Try to hold 30 seconds. Do the best you can. But 5 seconds usually does the trick. And the key is you don't want your core to sag, you want to keep your hips up in the air. That's going to activate your obliques. Now Victoria, when you lower it down, if you can't do a knee push up, so lower back down, up down to your knees. Then you're going to come up and then raise off your knees. Yeah, so that's totally acceptable. You can lower down to your knees in order to do this. Okay, excellent. Now let's walk back up into the standing position.

[09:13] And that's going to set you guys up in the perfect position for your air squat. Okay? So as you're here, you just want to lower down, thighs to parallel, hands up as a counter balance. Come back into standing. All the way up, all the way down. Already start breaking a sweat now. That's a good thing. Now if you notice key things here, their knees aren't going too far forward. The knees initiate the motion, but then they start to sit back and down. They don't round here at the back and collapse to keep themselves up. If you start to collapse, you probably need to shorten your distance, shorten the depth of your squat. You want to push down to your heels. You want to activate all the muscles in the posterior chain, your hamstrings, your glutes. Good core activation, proper alignment of the spine. And there again, you're not trying to do as many reps as possible. You're just trying to do good repetitions, full range of motion. About 15 more seconds. Reading is very important through it. Inhale by the nose, exhale by the mouth.

[10:18] Okay, excellent work. Now let's walk out here, okay? And as we get down, we're going to get in the quadruped position. Meaning, I want my hands underneath my shoulders and I want my knees underneath my hips. A wide enough base so I have stability, but not too wide. Then I'm going to go opposite knee to elbow, extend, hold, five, four, three, two, one. Then back in, we're going to stay on the same side. Now stay on the same side, everybody. So you're just going to switch opposite knee to opposite elbow. Three, two, one. Keep going and in and out. Five, four, three, two, one. Two more times. Five, four, three, two, one. One more time. Five, four, three, two, one. Now let's switch sides. So get your stance in place, proper base, and go.

[11:18] Five, four, three, two, one. Five, four, three, two, one. Three more, five, four, three, two, one. Two more, four, three, two, one. One, one more, five, four, three, two, one. Excellent work. Now let's come around to a lying position, lying face up. Okay, and now we're gonna do our straight up. Okay, so we're pulling our toes back towards us, hands are overhead. We're gonna try to sit straight up and touch the ceiling here, okay? And then we're gonna lower right back down, right when the hands touch, right back up. We're gonna finish off with one minute of this, and that will complete our warmup. Remember, this is not a race, this is just a warmup. The importance of this is the form,

[12:18] and it's not the repetition, it's not the number of repetition, it's to be able to break a little bit of sweat and ready to go for a after, to be ready for a hard workout. That's a very good point, George. And if you notice, George is sweating. Everybody here is sweating. It's a difficult warmup, but yet everybody's able to talk. Everyone's able to still interact. They're not to that point where, you know, they're filled with lactic acid. We're not working out yet. Just getting everything loose and ready. About 10 more seconds. Five more seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. Great job, everybody. That complete our warmup, and now we're ready to attack the real workout. Congratulations. The real workout is a full body strength workout. Hi, everyone. I'm Georges Saint-Pierre, and welcome to Rush Fit Full Body Strength

[13:19] and Conditioning Workout, designed by Eric Owings. Thank you, George. What we have here today is a full body strength and conditioning workout that starts out with sort of a simplistic round and round one, but don't let this see you, okay? You got to really get after it, because what this does is it pretty much floods the body with lactic acid, and then from there, we're trying to push through for the rest of the four rounds, okay? So let's not delay. Let's go and get started, right? Round one, starting off with our air squat, and we're gonna go right into the Hindu push-up. 10 air squats, five Hindu push-ups, as many rounds as you can get within five minutes. Everybody ready? Let's do it. And go. So notice how Georges is just dropping down. He's going right into a squat, trying to get his thighs to parallel. If you want to hop out a little bit like that, that's totally acceptable. Then he goes right into the Hindu push-up position, down and up. Right back, guys? Try to be quick with it, too. You can find your, you can get your bearings in round one. Try to get to know the exercise, but once you feel you have it, attack it.

[14:20] A good goal to shoot for is probably, I don't know, 10, 15 rounds, and just one round, okay? You just want to speed right through it. You want full range of motion all the way up and down. If you start to fatigue throughout, take a little break, catch your breath, try to push through. Good job, Victoria. A little bit deeper, Georges. Team Bucket Knapp. Yes, sir. The front of your thigh parallel with the ground. Nice sign, perfect form. Great, Victoria. Woo! Let's push it, let's push through it. Let's go, everyone. Georges, try to let your head follow your body. So try to let your head look up there, okay? As you go up, try to look up in the air a little bit. There you go, then back up. Excellent. Now, if at home, if you're having some difficulty keeping this type of work rate, remember, Georges is highly conditioned. So you might not be able to do this type of pace. A little bit deeper, Georges. Try to get deeper on that, okay? And if that's the case, you have to work slow, that's fine. Just do what you can do. And also remember that if you can't get all the way down,

[15:20] say your balance isn't there, your flexibility's not there, you might just go down with a squat like this. That's totally acceptable. If you notice here, Victoria, she's doing a variation on the push-up. It's slightly easier, but it allows you to stay working. You notice that she's down on her knees. She's still going through the full range of motion. She's just decreased the resistance because of how she's down on her knees. This is totally acceptable, too. Adjust the work out according to your fitness levels. If you feel you can push harder, go harder. If you feel this is too difficult, slow it down and find the range of motion that works for you. You guys are two minutes in, you have three minutes to go. Let's push now, okay? Yes, sir. Energy, everyone. Let's go. A little bit deeper, George. When this ties to parallel, don't shoot the movement. Yeah! Good, Victoria, way to push. That's it, George. You notice George likes a wide stance. Ion likes a little bit more narrow stance, and that's okay. There's personal variations throughout. You have to find how the movement feels best to you.

[16:23] You can just attack it. The main thing is, is good core activation. If you notice, everybody has a doing their squat. They're not slouched over. You don't see around the back like this. Everybody's in a nice upright position. That's very important. All right, you guys are about two minutes and 15 seconds. You gotta really push it out. Now remember the whole objective here. Everybody at home, everybody that's watching this, you're trying to get as much lactic acid in your body. You're trying to experience fatigue. It's like you start a fight and your opponent's attacking you right from the get-go. We're more than halfway, let's go. You have less than two minutes now. Everybody maintaining good form. That's it, George, let's go, buddy. Try to get speed now, okay? Down and back, down and back. Good, one more. Back up, right on the squats again. Thighs parallel though, every time. All the way up. I try to extend that hip a little bit more. You'll notice that as fatigue starts to set in,

[17:23] the form wants to go away a little bit, and that's totally okay. I mean, that's gonna happen, but try to stay on top of it. Try not to cut your squat short as you stand. Try not to come here and go back down. Try to get full extension in the hip, and try to get the thighs all the way down to parallel. Don't cut corners. Okay, I have a minute and 15 seconds now. Remember, this is a simplistic routine, but the simplicity is part of the beauty of it. You have to get after, you have to attack, you have to do as much work as you can with these two simple exercises. Done correctly, you're working every muscle in your body, and this is gonna cause changes. All right, you guys have 55 seconds. Less than a minute now, right? Let's get after it. Good, George. Ah! You didn't break the foot. 45 seconds. Come on, George, faster, buddy. I know you got more in you, let's go. Ah! 35 seconds. Down and back, that's it, go.

[18:25] 30 seconds now, right? Last 30 seconds. Ah! Let's win the round, think about a difficult fight. Neck and neck, you're your opponent or dead even, you have to do something to win the round. It's gonna be your work capacity, just gonna determine that a lot of times. 15 seconds. Let's get after, we have 10 seconds now, okay? 10, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Okay, great, everybody relax. In the round one, now get ready for round two, okay? Just, get ready, get your dumbbell in place. Do what you have to do, we're gonna do a dumbbell getup followed by a one leg, one arm row. Okay, it's very important that you keep your eye on the dumbbell at all times. So when I'm doing this motion, notice guys, I'm here, here. Notice how when I come up here, I never take my eyes off the dumbbell. Then I lower down, then I go into my one leg, one arm row. Doing three repetitions, put my foot back down, press back up, put my knee on the ground,

[19:27] post my hand, kick through, lower down elbow, shoulder, lie flat, then I switch hands, okay? Very important during round guys, don't try to breathe like this. The body is like a straw, if you bend the straw, the air doesn't go through. Recuperate, stay straight even though you're tired. It's great advice George, we have a 10 second warning now, okay? So let's everybody get down on the mat, get your dumbbell in hand, let's get ready to go. In the proper position, let's get ready in three, two, one, go. Now it's very important throughout, your eyes have to stay on that dumbbell, I can't stress that enough, you don't wanna drop this dumbbell in your head as you're performing this motion. That's just always a bad idea. And when they take it back up, take your time, sometimes you might have to curl, you might have to catch your breath down here in the standing position. This is a very difficult exercise, there again, it looks simplistic, but it's very deceiving. You have a lot going on here, there you go. And George, you can try to get a counterbalance going on here with your hand too, if you wanna counterbalance through the hand when you do your rowing. Yes sir.

[20:28] The whole idea here is repetitions, once you feel you have these movements mastered, once you feel you have the form, proper. Try to attack it, try to get after it with as much intensity as you can, do as many repetitions as you can. In time maybe you increase the weight of your dumbbells by five pounds, 10 pounds, whatever you feel you can increase. Those are the variables that you can control, and that's what leads to progress, so it increases your fitness. That's it George. Switch, switch, yep. Switch, one more, once you're down. Yes, you're gonna switch back and forth. Nice work Victoria. Great iron. You'll find as you're doing this, for some people you find when fatigue sets in, you might only be able to come halfway up, you might not feel comfortable coming all the way up. That's fine, you can just do a half get up, but after you do a half get up, I would like to see you come around onto your knees, then just row there, that way you're still getting that rowing motion, remember rowing, pooling, is an important component of fitness. So we don't wanna leave that out, but if you feel like you can't come all the way up to the standing position, you don't feel comfortable with that, until you don't have the balance or the technique yet.

[21:30] It's perfectly okay, just do a half get up, lower down, come around to your knees, and do your rowing off your knees. Great job Victoria. You guys are a minute 45 inches, means you have three minutes and 15 seconds left, almost halfway there. That's great George, because many reps as you can, okay? Good balance, good stability, good, but the shoulders move around the spine, excellent, that's perfect for him. Yes sir. Are you going to ionize in the dumbbell, understanding that's it? Yeah, it's important to keep the eyes on the dumbbells, you don't wanna get hurt with this. And George, would you say that focus and concentration is probably one of the most important things in a fight? Yeah, like now I'm fixing a point to keep my equilibrium, when I'm on one leg. Fix a point. When you're not looking at your dumbbells, fix a point when you're doing your rows on the floor. That's very important. That point, that doesn't move. Now you guys have reached the halfway mark, it's time to really get after it, okay? Remember one intensity.

[22:31] Yes sir. And notice Victoria, she's switching to the variation I was talking about before. She's doing a half get up, then she's lowering down, she's rowing around to her knees, and then she's doing a row off the knees. This is totally fine. You can still get a good work rate, is make sure you protect your spine. Don't try to over twist with the weight in your hand, always set the weight down. Be careful as you're doing it. Work within a speed that you know you can control. George and Ion are getting after it, because you're doing great. Good. Now you'll notice, both Ion and George, they both have very good balance, so they're able to come right up into here, get up on one leg and do their rows. If you're able to do the full get up, but you find now your form's doing this, you're getting the wobbles, okay? That's all right, just set your foot down on the ground, and you can use your arm that doesn't have the dumbbells, a brace arm. That gives you more stability, you're still getting the row. It's more difficult than the variation that Victoria's doing, but yet, it's a little bit more simplistic than what George and Ion are doing. Okay, 90 seconds guys, almost there.

[23:35] George, you're doing great buddy. Ha! Come on Ion, let's go. Excellent Victoria. And here again, if you notice throughout, everybody here has their bodies in proper position. There's no rounding of the spine as they're rowing. If the core's activated, the spine's in a strong neutral position. The abdominals are activated, everything's doing what it's supposed to do. That's how they're able to get all this work done, okay? If you find there again, your form is starting to break apart. Step back, hip pause, just take a break, let the round continue on, do whatever you wanna do, but just don't injure yourself. It's a simple looking motion, but it's quite difficult. It can be complex. 45 seconds now, okay? This is it, let's get after it. Nice George. Get after it, but keep that form. Yep. Keep the right form. Excellent Victoria. 30 seconds. Yep, straight up, down, back.

[24:37] 20 seconds now, let's go George. Try to get at least one on this side than one on the left side, okay? Yes sir. Let's do it quick, you got 15 seconds now. Good, 10, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, time. Reaching in to round two, okay? Now get ready because we have round three coming up. Now it's gonna start getting more intense, okay? We're building the complex, and we have more exercises, right? So we have four different exercises, 30 seconds each, one a quick five second transfer into the next exercise. After you complete all four, we're gonna take a 30 second break, then we're gonna get after it again, okay? So here's the exercise, we have our dumbbell piston, all right? As you're that, we have our dumbbell squatter. So we're gonna come in with the dumbbells, here and up, and remember guys, very important spine position here. We don't wanna be rounded over, okay? We come up, then we have our sumo high pull, coming up, elbow above the wrist, popping the hip. You can fold a little bit over, remember a strong back position,

[25:38] then we finish off here with our narrow pushup. If you need to lower down to the knees, totally acceptable. And if you have to rest back, after that we get a 30 second break, and we get after it again, okay? This way. Get ready for round three now, okay? So take your time, everybody, settle in, get a good stance, remember feet shoulder width apart, remember as we press up, we're looking down, as we squat down, we're looking up, okay? Get good squats, everybody in good position, ready, go. Now this movement uses a lot of muscle. This is pretty much combining all of the major movements, we're pretty much in every muscle in the human body here. So you'll find this is very difficult. Set a pace, you can take a little pause in between and stand if you need. Once you feel you have the, the reason why we're calling it the piston, right? Is your body's like a piston, you're just going up and down. You're helping your legs, legs are helping fire your arms, everything's working together here, okay? Five more seconds. Three, two, one, dumbbells down. You don't drop them, just hold them in front of you, get ready, okay?

[26:39] And three, two, one, squat thrust. Excellent. So the most important thing about doing this type of squat thrust is to make sure that you don't round your back as you're going down. We don't want you coming down like this and hopping back. Want you to set the dumbbells down, squat down, hop back and squat back up. If you want it, you find it's too much free to handle or hurt your hands, you can do this exercise without the dumbbells in your hands. You can set them down from the piston onto a table, almost there guys. You have a trick as to try to look up to the ceiling. One, time, good and relax. Now back up in the standing, wide stance now, okay? Let's get ready and go, sumo high pulls. Exploding up and down. Elbows above the wrist, try to pop that hip, get everything together. Now we're working a lot of the pulling muscles about it. It's sort of a counter motion of the piston, the piston out of the narrower stance. Now we're in a wider stance working different muscles, the adductors, the glutes a little bit more, okay? Using the trapezius, the rear deltoids,

[27:40] almost there guys, five more seconds. Three, two, one. All right, dumbbells back to the front, let's lower them down to the ground, get ready in the pushup position and go, narrow pushups, all right? Get after it. Now after this we have a 30 second break, all right? And it's not the idea of taking a big break, it's just enough to kind of regroup mentally and get ready to go after this all over again. That's it, all the way down George, try to get your chest really down to the ground. Notice how victorious, take a little break on the knees, that's totally acceptable. Just when you're ready, get back in it. There you go, I am trying to pull that core in though, a little bit, okay, tighten everything up. Almost there, three, two, one, time. Take a 30 second break, all right? So you can just relax for a second, do whatever it takes, you can stay on your knees, you can stand. Most important thing is when we pick those dumbbells back up to do the second part of this round, we don't bend over, we address the dumbbell properly, stand up, pick it up. It's always a great idea, like I said, if you're doing the variations, the push ups

[28:40] and the squat thrust without the dumbbells in your hands, set them down in a chair, set them down in something we don't have to bend, set them down in something right there waist height. Let's get ready now, pick up those dumbbells, we're getting after it again. 30 second go very quick. Yes, it's gone, and go. Now it's repetitions, man, don't hold anything back here, okay? Because you're not doing this one again, this is it. Got one more shot at it, let's go. I know it's burning, but as fast as you can. 15 seconds now. Don't forget to look down when you press up. 10 seconds. Notice I'm getting a full squat every time, very important. Five, four, three, two, one. Okay, take a little break, get ready and squat thrust now, go. Good, good form throughout, very important. We squat it all the way down. And remember, if I wanted to set the dumbbells down and just do it like this, that's fine. If I wanted to set the dumbbells down and step back and step up,

[29:41] totally acceptable variations, okay? Lift with your leg, nothing with your back. Notice what Victoria's doing, this is totally fine, okay? You can step back, stand up, totally okay. Three, two, one. Now with the dumbbells, just address them properly, get in proper position, okay? Dumbbells, palms facing us and go, sumo high pulls. Elbow high, okay? Try to really pop with those hips, use the legs, arms back. This is working everything, okay? Don't let the light weights deceive you, this is extremely difficult. When you try it, you're gonna understand what we're talking about. Yeah, go for the rep with a good form. Okay, we got five seconds, let's push it out. Come on, Victoria, you're doing great. And time, okay? Close those dumbbells to the front, put them down on the ground, we're back in our push-up position. Last one. Last 30 seconds, let's go, get after it. As many as you can do, all the way down, all the way up.

[30:42] Good corpusin, George, lower. I want that chest almost to the ground, okay, every time. Get lower. 20 seconds, doing great for George. I'm gonna do a few more there, okay? Back into position, lower down, excellent. You got to rest back in between 10 seconds, let's go now. Come on, George, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Okay, that brings it in at round three, but it's just a short break, guys. We have one minute, right? Do what you have to do, stretch out a little bit, stay loose, and we'll be right back on at round four. Round four is very similar, right? It's a dumbbell circuit, light dumbbells, lots of repetitions. How you feeling, George? Feel great. I'm lying to you, everyone. I'm in pain right now, but I know that's what I need. That's what I need to get in shape. Let's do a quick overview, right? We have about 30 seconds. So we have an alternate backward lunge. We're gonna stabilize down, okay? Come up, stabilize down, switching legs back and forth. After we have that, we have our wide press.

[31:42] Going side to side, we have our internal, external curl, and we have our cross-back lunge with a reach, okay? Same format, 30 seconds on, five-second transfer time, 30 seconds after we go all the way through. 10 seconds, now let's go and pick our dumbbells up and get ready, okay? Remember to address the dumbbells properly. There you go, good. Get ready. Three, two, one, backward lunges with the stabilization at the front. Go. Hold, then switch legs. Now, like all things, the stabilization just adds an extra component to it. We're putting some balance into what we're doing, okay? If you find that you don't feel comfortable, come up from one leg, just do it like this. If you find this one to be stationary, just do a split squat, then switch after a few reps. That's okay, you can do it like that. Find the variation that works for you. Find a way to make the exercise work for you. Five seconds. Three, two, one, and the wide press. Alternating arms side to side, let's get after it, okay? And go.

[32:45] Mary, the transfer time that we're doing through is just a little bit of time, just enough time to get ready and go to the next exercise. If you're a very fit, you don't wanna do it, don't even take the little five second rest. Just get right after it. Okay, start at the T, lower down, and get ready to come back at it again. Almost there, we have 10 seconds. George, activate that core, okay? Don't sag their shoulders back. I want everything good, nice and stable. If you have to rest, you have to rest. Almost there. All right, dumbbells down, hold in position. All right, three, two, one, internal, external curl. Inside to outside. And remember guys, we want full flexion, full extension. We don't want a short choppy motion here. We wanna come all the way up, all the way down. This is working all the muscles inside the shoulder, the biceps, the forearms. That's why it burns like crazy, right George? Yes sir. It's okay, you're doing great. 10 more seconds, almost there, stay on it. Five, four, three, two, one.

[33:47] Okay, get ready now guys. Three, two, one, crossback lunges. Go side to side, reach into the front, let the dumbbells lower down in front of you as you reach. Excellent Victoria, nice sign. Good George. George's making a little more difficult, he's bringing his dumbbells straight up like this, so you can kind of let him flop down if you want to. This is great, he's working his biceps a little bit more. Almost there. Five seconds. Three, two, one. Okay, you can set the dumbbells down, you have a 30 second break here. Okay. Try to get your composure, stay loose. I know George, you like the shadow box, sometimes in two rounds, that's totally fine. Totally acceptable. Because there is no really, there is no break during your fight. And there's no rest. And those five minutes, you have to pay attention. Let's keep moving. Okay guys, try to stay loose, stay relaxed. Got 10 seconds, let's go and pick our dumbbells back up, address them properly, get them back in your hands. And we have the alternate backward lunge

[34:48] with the stabilization, okay? Get ready, three, two, one, go. Backwards lunges with the stabilization. Switching legs side to side. Ah! Let's go to it, let's push. Looking good. Last round of the exercise. Everybody's doing a great job. By switching exercises, you switch muscle groups, and that's great because you can keep pushing through. You know what to give up, you don't have to stop moving. Keeps the calories burning, gets the metabolism working. Okay guys, and that's time. Let's relax for a second. Let's bring the dumbbells up here into the wide position and go, wide presses, side to side. Your core sub-alive. You can go a little bit more at an upward angle here. Okay, a little bit more, yeah, there you go. Good job. A little bit more extension on that arm, George. Same thing, try to get it up there a little bit more. Ah! Keep the core active, okay? 10 seconds.

[35:56] And time, okay, let's lower it down here now, okay? We have the internal, external curl. All right, let's get after it. Inside the outside, I know it's burning guys, let's just go, let's get after it. That's the George Good core activation. Oh, sorry, everybody's fine, it's in a nice position. We don't want any of this, okay? We don't want this, we're trying to pull it. That's the case, relax. Lower your weight, one or the other. Ah! Keep it going, keep it moving, keep it moving. You have eight seconds, full extension, full flexion. Three, two, one. All right, and get ready. We have the cross-back lunges with the reach. And go, let's finish the round strong now, okay? Last one, let's go everyone. Good form and as many as we can. Like your life is depending on it. 20 seconds. Everyone's doing great, 15 seconds. Get after now, speed, speed, speed, try to think about moving quick, okay?

[36:57] Last 10 seconds. Three, two, one. Time, okay, let's go set the dumbbells down. Ah! That brings it in to round four, okay? Now we have the last round. This is the championship round. Yeah, this is the one that determines who's gonna be the champion here. If you're gonna win, you're gonna lose. Make the difference between the boys, the kids, and the adults. Okay, now let's take a look real quick, a quick overview here, okay? What we have coming up. We have our prone roll, all right? We're gonna do this for 30 seconds. Then we're gonna pop up, like we did our squat, so we're gonna stand, narrow our stance. We have a power clean, 30 seconds. And after we do our power clean, we have a push press, okay? 30 seconds. We go through that two times, no rest. Then we finish up combining all those movements into one. Where we try to do as many repetitions as we can within two minutes. Now remember this, guys, it's very important that when we do that, it's the widening of the stance and the narrowing of the stance, the transfer between the standing and the ground, all right, very important. Now let's go and get our dumbbells in our hands.

[37:58] Let's go, everyone, I know we're in front of us. We're in that prone position. All right, we wanna make the buzzer, all right? We got five, four, three, two, one. Go. So you're just rowing side to side, okay? Trying to keep the core stabilized. This is working everything here. If you want a strong core, this is one of the best ones. Now, I don't want to apologize. I took your 20 before and I never gave it back. Let's move you up and wait a little bit here, okay? Eric is a dictator, ladies and gentlemen. A dictator of fitness, he has. Okay, five, four, three, two, one. Okay, let's come up into a proper position. Bring the dumbbells up, remember, narrow our stance, get them out to the outside, and we're doing our power clean, okay? Don't be in a rush here, but let's go, let's explode. Box running. Try to land with a soft knee position, George. Good. 15 seconds.

[39:00] Good, and the torturer try to squat a little bit before you do that curl. There you go. That's a fine variation. Have duct time with the power clean, you can do that. Now, keep the dumbbells up top here, okay? Let's clean them back up, clean them back up, let's go. And we have our push press. There you go, look down, George, don't arch the back too much, keep it in place. Less repetition is necessary. It's okay, lower down and wait. Totally acceptable. Address the dumbbells properly, clean it up, let's go. Back up, push press, there you go, good. Active core, don't lean back too much. Almost there, 10 seconds. Notice how she, yeah, it's great for the torturer, that's good. Excellent, and I am good job, and time. Dumbbells back down, wide stance, when we squat them down right back into the row, okay? Doing the prone row. Now, if you notice, that's good after that. So one, clock's running, no rest, there's no rest, let's go. Now if you notice what Victoria's doing, that she's doing it down the knees now, that's okay. If you start to fatigue here, you certainly notice you start to slouch over a little bit, that's totally okay. You can just do it right here off the knees. Fine substitution.

[40:02] Got five more seconds, you guys are doing great. Three, two, one, hop up, bring your dumbbells up, let's go. Narrow the stance, and you have your power clean. It's trying to get as many repetitions as you can in with good form. Land that soft knee position, leg drive towards, that's it. Point, you guys are almost there. Notice how Victoria, she's doing a squat with a curl. That's less complicated, but it's working similar muscles. Doesn't take as much coordination to do it this way, which is still working a lot of the body's muscles. Fine substitution. Five more seconds, last clean, hold it up there, Ryan. Hold it up there, George, keep it up top. Let's go, push presses, okay? And go, good. So the push press is basically an overhead shoulder press. Remember what we're using the legs for some assistance. We're getting a little bit more lift. George, activate that core, bring those abs out, okay? It's all right, you're almost there, buddy, 15 seconds. Let's go, get it back up there, get after it. Alright, guys, if George is fatiguing, don't be ashamed if you're fatiguing. Just work at your own rate.

[41:02] Let's go, five, four, three, two, one. Now connecting it all together, okay? Remember, we widen out our stance, squat it down. Let's go on it, guys, we're almost there. Two minutes of this and you're done, okay? The workout's finished. Let's finish strong, one, two, hop up. Good, narrow the stance, would you bring it together, power clean, push press. That's it, lower back down, widen the stance out. Bring the dumbbells to the middle, then squat them down, hop back. Good, and your rows. If you notice how what Victoria's doing here, she's stepping up, she brings the dumbbells into a good position, does a squat, does a curl, does a press, and then she's right back down, bringing the dumbbells in narrow, stepping back onto her knees. It's an easier variation, but you're working a lot of muscles. Remember, going horizontal to vertical. This is what makes mixed martial arts so difficult. This is what burns all the calories. This is what requires everything to activate, everything to function, every muscle in your body here. We're working it all. This is it. A minute and 10 seconds. Good explosion, that's it, Ayan.

[42:04] Excellent, George. One minute left now, come on. Let's see if you can get at least six of them, right? It doesn't make any difference if you get six or not. It's just to put a number out there. It's giving something to chase after. Give yourself something to chase after. Put a number out there. Attack it, keep good form, do your best. That's how you're gonna make progress. Let's go, George, 45 seconds. Good. That's two, let's go. Back down, wide stance, hop back. Come on, guys, 35 seconds and you're done. This is it, workouts over. Three, 30 seconds, George, come on, man, you can do it. You can get six, you can get six from the time I said it. You have to get after it though, okay? Power clean, push press, good. 20 seconds, you're right on target, let's go. You have to be quick at the transfers though. That's what matters. Nice sign, but try not to round that back when you come up, okay? Good position, 10 seconds, George, one more, let's go. Let's get after it. Let's go, come on, guys. This is it, let's go.

[43:06] Five, four, three, two, one. Great work, everybody. George, that's it buddy. Ah! The bell has rung, the fight is over. Ah! That was unbelievable. Woo! And still, that was amazing. Everyone, you've been through this workout with us. Congratulations at home. Nice job, everybody. And I think we deserve a good, good congratulations to us as well. Thank you very much. Super, everyone. Great job. Just finished our workout. Now it's time for the cool down. The cool down, it's very important. We're not gonna do a long cool down sequence, but the exercises, they're pretty much what they're doing is resetting your neuromuscular system so that you can go back into your daily life without having your muscles cramp and tighten up. We're really gonna stress a lot of the muscles

[44:08] around our hips, okay? That's where we did a lot of work. We're gonna do a lot of the muscle training, but we're gonna do a lot of the muscle training and we're gonna do a lot of the muscle training on our hips, okay? That's where we did a lot of work. Also, our lats, our shoulders, our chest. Pretty much the whole body, but we're gonna do the most effective stretches that we can do in the shortest amount of time. This routine should take no more than five minutes, five, six minutes, okay? So let's go and start down here on our left knee, right knee up, okay? What we're gonna do is we're gonna stretch the hip flexor so I'm gonna contract my abdominal muscles, trying to tuck my glutes right up here underneath me, trying to tilt my pelvis under. Then when I reach my left arm straight up in the air, fingertips pointing out towards the left, and I should feel the stretch coming right in here. Now we just wanna lift our chin up while maintaining this contraction, right? Looking straight ahead, contracting in the abdominals, glutes, stretches right up here in the front. If the arm goes forward, cause you have tight lats, try to force it up there in the air, okay? We have about 10 more seconds. So let's hang in there. Good. We really feel the hip flexor stretching in here. The hip flexor, exactly.

[45:09] Okay, great. Now we're gonna come up. We're gonna turn and face the other way, lower it down to the right knee. Take your time here now, okay? Let's go ahead and set everything in position. So we're gonna contract the abdominals and the glutes, and press straight up. And we're holding here for 30 seconds. Now 30 seconds is pretty much the minimum here. We just wanna do at least 30 seconds to make sure we, you know, we stretch out the body. But if you find you're enjoying this, don't be afraid to go back through this routine, you know, do it one more time, two more times. As much as you want. These are great stretches. You really can't get enough of these. There is a lot of benefit to gain from stretching. Okay. Now let's come up here. Now you can do a butterfly stretch, which Patrick is gonna demonstrate, or you can just lower right down here into the side straddle. Everybody's flexibility is different, but if possible, we just wanna try to splatter legs out here, keep the posture upright, and then we wanna go forward.

[46:11] You see the variation that Patrick's doing, is working the same muscles, trying to stretch the adductor muscles, right here in our inner thigh, okay? What I'm trying to do is I'm basically just pushing out, so is George, and we're trying to go forward. If we can, we wanna lie down flat here. Again, holding these stretch for 30 seconds. I remember when I used to be a kid, I used to go all the way down. Now as I'm growing up, getting older, it's impossible to do the same thing, because I didn't practice enough. Okay, good. Now let's close up here. Leg straight ahead. Now what we wanna do, we just don't wanna touch our toes. We wanna put our toes back towards us, contract our quadriceps, sit nice and upright, fingertips pointed down. We're pushing forward with the heel of our palm. If you find that to be too difficult, by going forward like this, and you just see, it's way too much, you can just do this. Brace your hands right here by your hips, push up, try to keep your posture upright. Still pulling your toes back,

[47:12] still contracting your quadriceps, and just trying to eventually lean forward. Once you can break 90 degrees going forward, you can probably take your hands off and push forward. Really good for the posterior chain. I'm straying, towel, over back. This is what you need to do. Now let's turn to our right. I'm gonna kick my left leg around here. Bring my right leg in. Now if you notice, I stick my knee straight out from my hip, and I form a 90-degree angle here, a 90-degree angle here. Now what I wanna do is I wanna try to go forward, putting my head all the way down to the ground. Everybody has a different flexibility level though, but the key thing is to try to lean toward your left on the stretch. If you're left, legs back, lean toward your left. Even if you have to stay upright, if you can lower down all the way, that's great. If you're right here, that's fine. This is for the extensors.

[48:12] This is for the muscles on the outside of the hip. A lot of jumping, kicking, all those motions, we've really worked those muscles. Pretty much anything functional, you're using the extensors and the flexors. Now let's rotate around. This is kind of cool. We're gonna lean to our right and swing to our left, and we come right back this way. Take your time getting into position though. Again, you want your left knee in front of your left hip. You wanna try to create a 90-degree angle here and a 90-degree angle here. And same thing, try to lie forward. If you have to, you don't have to push forward. We don't wanna feel any type of tearing or a really strong pulling, just a slight pull in the muscles. The muscles that we're trying to feel are the muscles right outside here, okay? Some people might feel a little bit up in the back. You should be feeling it all over. Some people might feel a little bit of hamstring. For the most part, you wanna feel it on the outer part of your left hip here. Trying to lie down. Always a side that you're more flexible than the other. That is completely normal.

[49:13] Okay, now we're just gonna kick back and through underneath, so in the quadruped position. So if you notice, we start out here with our knees right underneath our hips, right? Now what we're gonna do when our hands are underneath our shoulders, we're just in a strong foundation. We're gonna extend our right hand forward and our left hand forward. Now what I want you to do is drop your butt back while keeping your fingertips out there. Try to touch your butt to your heels and try to get your armpits down to the ground. Once you do that, you're trying to inch your fingertips away as much as you can. And when we're doing this, we wanna feel the stretch coming right down throughout the lats, okay? Some people find that they spread their knees out here. They also get a adductor stretch here as well. That's good. You just, you know, get more flexibility in there. I happen to have a loose adductor, so I don't feel anything in the adductors, but I have tight lats. It really stretches my lats every time. You're really lucky. Me, I'm tight pretty much everywhere. Okay, guys, great. Now we're gonna come up here into this kneeling position

[50:13] and what we wanna do is we wanna put our knees together, our heels together. We wanna sit back here under our butt. We're gonna interlace our fingers behind our back here. The most important thing is that I start to straighten my arms. That's more important than how high they get. At first they get straight, then I retract my shoulder blades, meaning I try to pull my shoulder blades together. Once I do that, I raise up as high as I can and I wanna feel stretched throughout my biceps, my deltoids, my pictorial muscles, all of that. And there's almost an infinite amount of stretches, but we don't wanna spend all day stretching. You guys just did a hard workout, so we just wanna hit some of the ones that really get the body back to where it was before you did your workout. Good, Patrick. You know, George is very tired here, so this is a great stretch for him. Absolutely. Everybody else has good flexibility. I should do this stretch more often. Don't be scared that if you do something that you're not good at, that's when you need to work on it. You can see this stretch, I'm pretty bad at it.

[51:14] That is something that I should put more time into. Okay, buddy. That's time, and that concludes our cool-down. So you have to remember that the cool-down, although it seems like it's easy and it's almost like it's a part of the workout that everyone wants to forget to do, we did all the hard stuff, you know, we warm up because we wanna get ready for the hard workout, then we do the cool-down. But sometimes we forget to do, remember, don't forget the cool-down. It's actually gonna help you to recover and to come back so you can be consistent, work out on a regular basis. It's very important that you do all parts of the workout and you try to be as consistent as possible because that's what leads to progress. If you just, you know, come in on occasion and you'd like do, like, maybe a round or two and then, you know, you skip a few days, you're not gonna see the results that you're looking for. The results are gonna come through consistency. That's what's important thing, and the consistency is given to you by allowing your body to recover properly, which is why we do the cool-down. And also, the cool-down is not only physical. For me, I use the cool-down as a way to change my mind. I start from being the athlete, George St. Pierre, the fighter.

[52:16] When I work out, I'm the fighter. I'm a martial artist. But the cool-down allowed me to make the transition by being the fighter to the everyday normal guy. So it's more than an actual workout. It's also the changing of your mind, putting your mind back into what it should be in everyday's life. Great job, everybody. Music

[53:28] Hi, everyone. I'm George St. Pierre with Eric Owings, and we are here today to explain to you the Rush Fit Foundation movement. The foundation movements are, well, they're our foundation. So we don't want to just rush through this segment and think that these movements aren't necessary, and you just want to hop into the workouts. It's actually very important that you spend time focusing on these basic foundation movements and then go into the workouts. If you've mastered the movements in this segment, you're gonna find that you're gonna be able to perform everything with ease, well, not with ease, but with competency. And by doing that, you're gonna be able to progress and reach your fitness goals, whatever they may be. So it's very important you take time. You watch, you learn, and then you spend time mastering them. You don't need to use a lot of weight. Some of the movements are just body weight. Some require dumbbells. But it's gonna be very important that you take your time and that you make sure that your body's in proper alignment. Pay attention throughout the concept of core activation, the concept of good posture, of doing everything with correct form, minimal amount of weight,

[54:30] and then add weight as you feel necessary. If you do these movements correctly, you're gonna find understanding the future DVDs or you're gonna be a piece of cake. We all train for different purposes, but make sure we get those movements right. Okay, everybody, let's talk a little bit about the squat. The squat's one of the most fundamental motions that you're ever going to do in exercise and fighting in anything. I think almost everything that you do almost always has a component of changing your level up and down. So whether a person says level change, whether they say shoot, sprawl, whatever it is you're doing, almost always there's a little bit of a bend here. So we want to develop this to the fullest capability. That's why we include squatting. You see a lot of squatting in this program. And in the beginning, you might notice that your range of motion is not so good, but eventually it will increase as long as you take your time and kind of work within your own limits. And eventually you want to get to what is considered a full range of motion,

[55:30] which is a parallel thigh to the ground and an upright posture. So if you notice when George comes down, George, if you can, squat down and hold the squat here. If you notice, George is pretty much settling into his heels. His knees aren't far past his toes, and he's sitting back like he's sitting down into a chair. Then he comes back up in the standing. Yes, and go into a few reps, George. Let everybody see you're doing the reps and hold again at the bottom, George, if you can. Come back down. Good. Yeah, right there. And like I said, if you notice parallel thigh and then he starts to come up. Now, if necessary, the modification, if you're having a tough time, or you can stop, George, is going to be just to go a little bit more shallow. But what we don't want to see is we don't want to see the knees buckling in. This is a definite no-no. We want the knees coming out. Okay. If necessary, you can widen your stance a little bit. So you don't want a narrow stance. Remember, shoulder width, toes are slightly to the outside, just a little bit. We're not going really wide, just a little bit to the outside. And what you want to do is your arms come up as you sit back. So you have to kind of sit back.

[56:30] Imagine you're sitting into a chair. And if you're having a tough time, you can always put a chair behind you. But if you find that even you lose control, like you get here and you almost fall over, you fall back, that's totally okay. What you want to do there is you want us to go a little bit more shallow than standing. And eventually work your depth down until you get the parallel. So we're going to do a couple more, George. Everybody see the full range of motion? Yep. Then up. One more. And this is a motion that, okay, George, you can relax. For George, this is extremely important for any fighter, for any athlete, for anybody almost, is the ability to go up and down with control of the core, with complete stabilization here in the body. You want to maintain this here, all the way down to there. This is an essential motion for life, no matter whether you're fighting or just going about your daily routine. Absolutely. It's a movement pattern that happens every minute of every fight. And that's the squat.

[57:37] The lunge is one of the most essential motions probably next to the squat. It's a little bit more complex. So there's a few more things we have to pay attention to. The squat, for most people, is a basic movement. Whereas lunging, we're actually going forward to the side, backwards, or crossing behind. There's basically four ways that we're going to do this. So, George, if you can go in all four directions, let's go two to the front, then two side to side. The knee doesn't touch the ground when you go in the front. And backwards. You see, my knee doesn't touch the ground. And the cross back variation. Here we go, side to side. So we try four different variations. George has a good range of motion here. He's doing everything the proper way. And George, if I can, if I can just have you stop for a second and go out there into the lunge and lower down. And you can lower down. George is going to let his knee touch here just to relax his leg muscles.

[58:38] But normally, he's not going to let his leg touch. He's going to kiss the ground. It's just going to touch and come back up. Now, if you notice here, George, although he comes out, he comes forward, he's not driving his knee forward. He actually steps. He takes a natural step forward and then he just sinks his weight down into his heel. That's very important. What we don't want happening is this, and then I keep going forward. And I feel a stretch here, like this is like a tearing sensation. Also, this puts a lot of stress on the knee. So, I want to keep my foot on the ground. And then as I take this natural step forward, I go here, then I just lower down. Okay? We want to maintain good posture. Sometimes we include a touchdown. That's totally acceptable. And the same thing. Now, if we come up, George, if we go to the side, notice how the knee doesn't go forward. You actually sit back. You sit back under your heels and the arms act as a counterbalance here. Or you can touch down. If we move backwards, that's good. And if we go backwards here, same thing. We go back and then I sink down into the heel of the front leg. And if I go to the transverse of the cross back lunge, I come here.

[59:41] My front leg, I sink down into the heel and up. Now, each one of these lunges, we go in different directions because well, our body can move in different directions. We don't want to develop strength in just one range of motion. We want a variety of movement patterns that give us more balance throughout our body. And would you say this is pretty similar to what you do when you take someone down, when you shoot him for a take-down? Absolutely. Not only I would say the take-down, the changing level, the footwork. Even the most basic stuff that we do in mixed martial art. We use lunges in a certain way. And you'll find at home, say if you have a hard time going all the way out into this position, you feel that you lose your balance and have enough tough time. The best thing to do here is go a little bit wider with your stance. Take a natural step forward and then you're just going to do what we call a split squat. So it's a variation. We're not lunging. We actually stay in stance. So you can stay in stance and just touch down or just stay up here and you come up. And if you find you have to restrict your range of motion a bit, that's totally acceptable. But what you don't want to do is come out here where you feel like you're falling and your knees are shaking

[1:00:44] and you're losing balance. So same thing with the lateral lunge. If I had to just stay here, I can do a stationary movement and restrict the range of motion a bit. But you want to try to get to where you do the full range of motion and include the movement patterns. But if you have to, you can stay stationary. Do say five reps, ten reps, how many are necessary from a stationary position. Then you switch, come into a stationary position and it'll look just like this. That's the modification if you're having a tough time. And that's the lunge. The push-up is one of the most basic upper body exercises we can do. It requires no equipment and you can almost do it in any space. If you just have a tiny little space in your living room, your bedroom, wherever, you can always do some push-ups. Now the key to a push-up is maintaining good alignment of the body. So I should almost be able to transfer the same exact stance that you see here standing right to the ground. We don't want to be caved in here but too high.

[1:01:45] We want to think about almost a line that forms if you do it straight through the body, your ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Once the deviations start to occur, that shows that your core stability is now malfunctioning and you're going to have to make a modification. We'll show some modifications but let's first take a look at how it's performed correctly. George, let's go ahead and do a couple push-ups here. Just a normal standard push-up. Notice how George has a great alignment here with his body. It's straight through and that's because George has a strong core. By having a strong core, he's able to maintain that position. Now, George can do a variety of push-ups here. Let's do some knuckle push-ups, George. By changing his grip, he changes the angle and the angle changes which muscles are working. He can work different parts of his body just by changing the way that his hands are placed. He can go narrower or wide with his grips. He can go up on his knuckles. That requires more wrist stability. Push-ups have a lot of variations. They have a lot of stuff you can do. Let's show a plio push-up here. This is an explosive push-up. It's the same movement but just performed differently.

[1:02:46] Okay, great. Go ahead and relax. That's basically a perfect push-up. Now, if you're having a tough time and you find, like I said, I come into this position and I get up here and I start doing this or my head starts coming down. I start breaking my form. The best modification you can make when that starts happening is, let's say I start off strong. I do five push-ups. But then my range of motion starts to get shorter. My neck starts to lead down. My hips start to sag. I want to try to maintain this alignment and then it's lowered down to my knees. From here, I continue on how I was doing just off my knees. That makes the resistance much less and I'm able to do it. If I find that even this, I start to sag and I start to break down. Then what I want to do is I just want to lower back, take a break, come back into alignment. So notice that means my shoulders are over my hands, my head's in place, and it's my arms that are bending. I'm going to stabilize my body with my core.

[1:03:46] Eric, is that fair to say that the push-up also basically works the core and all the body at the same time? It's not only the arm. Yeah, George, it's funny that you asked that because the thing about the push-up is that it's predominantly a core exercise. Remember guys, core is beyond just abdominals. It's pretty much everything that's stabilizing with the body. So just maintaining the push-up position is actually quite difficult. George tries to maintain this in good alignment for one minute. They'll start to fatigue. And what we're doing is we're adding on the arm exercise to it. So just don't think of a push-up as only a pushing exercise. Think about it as a total body exercise. And that's kind of like the whole thing that we're getting at in functional training because for fighting, you have to be able to use your whole body at one time and in life pretty much you have to. Yeah, that's a variation where George's a scapular retraction and now he's working the backside of his body. All right, great job. And that's the push-up.

[1:04:49] The sit-up is a very basic motion that I think everybody's probably done once or twice in their life. Whether we even realize it, sometimes we just sit up out of our bed so spinal flexion is really what we can call this, okay? What we're doing when we do a sit-up is we're trying to use the abdominals actually use our neck flexors here too. So pretty much think of the spine is not just here in this little area, right? It's the whole entire spinal column. And it's the idea of bringing everything forward. So that idea of flexion is a very essential movement pattern. One of the easiest ways to train this is by doing a sit-up. And you'll see this in the warm-up. So George is going to come up where George starts to raise up in the air. Good. Now as you lie down, let's bend the knees and do a traditional sit-up. Now where you take your elbows down toward your hips and you sit all the way up. Just widen your feet out a little bit if you can, George. Good. And these are all good variations. Now you'll find that throughout a fight you probably sit up quite a bit, right? Absolutely. Where you have to get up off the ground if you get taken down? Absolutely. Underground and also standing up I think just a basic punch.

[1:05:53] Sometimes you need to crunch down. Yeah, kind of cover. That's when the abdominal comes into play. And remember anything like this, this is spinal flexion. This is going to require the abdominal muscles to contract. Now we can overload this pattern by putting a weight in your hands. Just using your body weight sometimes is enough. So there's a lot of variety in how to do this. And you'll find that sometimes for some people a full sit-up can be sort of like jarring on the spine. Sometimes you have difficulty with that. If that happens to be the case, there's nothing wrong with just doing an abdominal crunch variation. The key thing is we don't want to yank the head forward. We just want to kind of put our fingers here or we can even cross over here. And when we do this, we just bring the shoulder blades off the ground and lower it out. So this is a modification for people who might find the full sit-up to be difficult. You can always do a partial motion. Then eventually as you get stronger work yourself into a full range of motion. And that's the sit-up.

[1:06:53] Now we're going to talk about back extension. Back extension is something that is very important in everything in life. All of these exercises that we're doing are extremely important. But this is one of those things that if we don't have our extensor, basically the erector muscle of the spine, we're going to collapse. We're going to develop a posture like this. And posture like this is not really good for anything in life, but especially not for fighting, right? I mean fighting is one of the things you have to have good posture. Exactly. Plus it's going to make you have injuries. You know, it's not going to keep your body healthy. It's very important to have a good posture, keep your body healthy and stay injury-free. Now, George is just going to show a variation of the back extension. And so you can lower it down here, George. You can do the more difficult one. And that's this. That's the opposite. But you can also just do it off the knees too. So if George goes down, if you notice when he gets up here, so yeah, he's got to activate all this. Now this has a little bit more to do than just back extension. That has glued activation. Now here, he's pretty much extending throughout the spine. He's working all these muscles. Now the glutes work here too.

[1:07:53] And this is one of the kneeling opposites, or the prone position opposites, is an advanced form of back extension, with also glued activation and various other things. Now, when he goes down, this is pretty much showing, I think, back extension in a more pure form. Although we are also encompassing pretty much everything here on the posterior chain. And George, if you can, tilt your chin in. What's happening here is pretty much contracting from head to toe all the way down his spine, all the way throughout. And as, yeah, you can go and relax down, George. So this is one of those movements that, although it appears simple, it's actually quite difficult. I mean, you'll find that like if you put this into the circuits and you're just doing this exercise on a daily basis, whenever you do that isometric contraction, what happens is you just basically, the lactic acid starts building up throughout the body. But as you do it more and more, you start to develop a tolerance to it. And you get stronger and you actually develop better posture where you can stay upright or perform a take down more efficiently or a guard pass more efficiently. Now we're going to show a modification here.

[1:08:53] If you're having a tough time doing the full extension with all four limbs off the ground, what George is going to do is going to put his head down on the ground and he's going to go one, then over to his other hand, two to his leg now, three, and then to his other one, four. You can try to hold each one for about five seconds. And eventually you can try to do the lying opposites. So George, let's go opposite leg, opposite arm. And you can go side to side like that. Now if you've done the opposites and you've been able to complete, you know, going side to side, now let's try doing everything together. You do all four limbs off the ground so you raise up George, try to raise the legs off. And what George is trying to do is get everything just pretty much keeping just as abdominals and his thighs on the ground and take everything else off the ground, which causes everything on his back to have to contract. And that's going to give him good back extension and good posture. And that's the back extension. Now let's talk about rotation. You'll find in this program there's a lot of movements that requires to rotate, moving our shoulders around our spine.

[1:09:56] This is a consistent theme you'll find pretty much throughout fighting too, right? I mean, they'll throw a punch, they'll throw a kick, they'll almost do any type of judo style takedown. There's almost always a rotational component. Absolutely. It's a natural movement pattern of the body. You can see this in every movement, every technique and mixed martial art. And you'll find though, as we're doing these rotation movements, sometimes we take a pose where we're just moving our shoulders around our spine, but our spine pretty much stays looking straight ahead. Sometimes we'll follow. So you'll notice that George now is following. Now George, let's shorten up your range of motion, but let's stay looking straight ahead with no movement from the head, whatsoever, just your shoulders moving around. And these are both acceptable forms of rotation. Now you also notice that George is what we call a prone rotation, okay? From down in the push-up position, just opening and closing. George, you don't have to even pause that long, just pause for about a second. So George is going to rotate. There again, he's rotating around and down. Go to the other side, going side to side. And there's also another form of rotation here that you'll see. Actually, there's various forms. You'll notice it's a consistent theme and you just want to be aware that it's not to overdo it.

[1:10:59] You want to try to over-rotate, let your natural range of motion sort of dictate that. Always start going with a restricted range of motion and gradually building up to where you feel like you're reaching those outer limits, then that's where you want to stop. You don't want to go too far. And George, let's just show the Kimoura sit-up. This is another sit-up that you'll see throughout. And notice how he's rotating as he comes up. So here again, we're almost combining the movement pattern, spinal flexion with rotation. And that's one of the things you're going to notice throughout the program is that there's a lot of rotation going on. One of the key things, though, is to make sure that you have your core activated, meaning that your muscles aren't loose and your spine's not really loose. You want to make sure everything's strong and stabilized. That way, as you're rotating, you're not going to hurt yourself. That's very important. That's also something we're going to talk about is the concept of core activation. But for right now, that covers rotation. Now, let's talk a little bit about core activation. Core activation is one of those things that it's actually very complex if you want to talk about it,

[1:12:03] because we can get into the debate on what part of the core are we talking about. We're talking about the core of the knee and the intrinsic stabilizers inside the knee or whatever little joint. But a consistent thing, we're talking about the stabilization of our midsection of the spine. That's where you're going to hear core activation throughout. Pretty much every exercise that we do, it has to be done first. We have to activate the core before we squat. We don't want to have a loose core, because then everything tumbles in. So we always have to keep the body active. One of the best examples, the simplest way I can explain this, and for George and for everybody at home, if I were to be in front of George, I'm going to punch him as hard as I can in the stomach. So say if you're in a square stand storage and you were to activate your core, you're going to brace for this punch that's going to push you to do it. Exactly. Now you saw what happened there. We're going to do it again. He braces. Now everything here tightens up. That's the transverse abdominis muscle. It's kind of like this little girdle that's tightening everything up. It's activating your diaphragm, your rectus abdominis, all these muscles around here. Everything's doing its job to keep the spine in place.

[1:13:03] So, well, in this case, so you can brace for a punch, but also if you were to lift a heavy weight, you'll find almost any movement that you do, that's going to become what you do before you do your movement. Whether you're going to take off running, whether you're going to throw a punch, whether you're going to throw a kick, whether you're going to do a power clean or a squat or anything, you're always going to have to have core activation. Let's just show one more example here with George. Let's go and go down into the plank position. And this is one of those ones that you can kind of almost test if your core is activating just by holding this. Now George's core is activating. We know this because of the alignment. We have ear, shoulder, hip. Everything here is nice and tight. In George's, he's contracted throughout. One thing of your notice here is that his body's not moving out. Although George is breathing, he's definitely, you know, oxygen is going in off his body. He's not losing the core activation. This is very essential. You don't want to start breathing, let your body collapse as you're breathing. You want to keep everything in place. And if you can, you try to breathe into the back of the lungs as you're there. Try not to just breathe real shallow.

[1:14:04] It's not going to be natural, but it's going to be a little bit more difficult because this is all contracting. This is restricting the movement of your ribs a little bit, but you'll still be able to breathe into the back. That's the whole idea. So breathe naturally, yet keep the muscles activated. It's a very important concept that not only for our program, but just for life in general. If you're ever going to pick anything up, if you're ever going to do any activity, this can help you. And that covers the basics of core activation. Okay, now let's talk about the burpee. The burpee is, in my opinion, it's one of those motions that probably best simulates the energetics of a fight. If you do it with an explosive nature and you really go after it, you can get a very intense workout in less than a minute. If you just do as many as you can. It's one of those things that, because there's so much muscle being used and there's so much movement involved, that this really accelerates the metabolism and it works pretty much every muscle throughout the body. Let's go ahead and have you show a few burpees, George, just in full speed.

[1:15:04] Let's do three of them. So if you notice, we have almost all those components we talked about. We have, okay, you can go and relax. We have squatting. We have sort of almost like a lunge. We have a plank position. We have core activation. We have jumping. We have a push-up. We have flexion of the spine. We have so much movement going on here. And for some people, this, we're actually for almost everybody, this is a difficult exercise. Absolutely. It's raised at a hard rate. And it's also pretty similar to a sprawl motion too, right? Like somewhere to try to take you down. It's almost like you're sprawling. You can say it's like a sprawl and also could be following by a takedown. The same push that you find during a takedown, it's the same push that you use when you come up. Yeah, so there's a lot of functional transfer. If you want to use that word, it's actually a great way to describe it. There's functional transfer from this movement into what George does or what most athletes do. Now, for some people, the most difficult part might be the squat thrust.

[1:16:05] So let's just show the squat thrust component, George, where you just jump back and jump up, okay? Now, if you have a hard time doing that, because George is a strong person and he has good coordination, for some people that might be a little bit too much in the beginning and the jump at the top. So what I'm going to suggest as a modification, if you're having a tough time doing the squat thrust, because you see squat thrust and burpees throughout the program, as I suggest you do this and sprawling. So this is a great substitution for squat thrust, burpees, and sprawling motions throughout. What I like to see you do is this. You just basically come down and try to get your hands onto the ground. You're going to step back with one foot, back with the other, back with the foot, back here, and then stand. That's a fine substitution. You'll find when you get used to it, you can build up speed, and then eventually you can get into the full motion where you hop back and you hop up. And that covers the burpee and the squat thrust. Okay, now we're going to talk a little bit about addressing the dumbbells.

[1:17:07] And what I mean by that is how we pick the dumbbell up off the ground. My recommendation for almost anybody, I even do this myself when I train, is to set my dumbbells on something about, anywhere between knee to waist height. I prefer a chair or a table, or if I'm at a gym, I prefer like the rack itself. And the reason being is we don't want to come up to our dumbbells and try to pick them up like this. Now throughout the program, you might notice, because we're doing real workouts, you might notice that that happens. You might notice people set their dumbbells down, they are bent in the spine. So you're going to be like, that's a contradiction. But what happens when you have a strong core, you can get away with it. If I do this to you right now, like I'm technically in bad posture, and look, I just did it the wrong way. But that's because I have a strong core. I'm able to do that. But if I'm deconditioned, then I do this type of motion, I could hurt myself. And that's very important to realize that just because you can get away with it, you should try not to. You should always make it your objective to do everything the correct way. So as you get stronger and stronger, you can make a mistake,

[1:18:07] but to do it the correct way, this is what George is going to show now. This is how we want you to come down if you're going to pick your dumbbells up off the ground. Notice how his back's in a strong, flat, neutral position. That means his core's activated. Now if you go up and you set your dumbbells back down, George, same thing. Notice he whitens out his stance a little bit. Then he drops them down, strong position. And that's how you address the dumbbell. The dumbbell squat is very similar to the squat that we learned for just basic body weight squatting. It's the same mechanics. The only difference is that now we have resistance at it. So George is going to come up, address the dumbbells. He's going to step back and he's going to set his stance at a shoulder width apart. His toes can point slightly outward, but for the most part, his legs are straight ahead. And with his dumbbells by his side, he's just going to squat down and then come back up. Notice how the dumbbells move a little bit out the way. Good posture. Try to get his thighs down to parallel each time. Good. Now George, if you can, let's clean him up. And now this is what we call a front squat.

[1:19:08] So it's pretty much the same thing. Notice how he lowers down and drives up. The weight stay high, pushing the elbows forward. And notice how he gets down deep. It's the same thing. So there's two basic variations that we're looking at doing. And that's our basic squat with our dumbbells to the side. And then with our dumbbells up, the front squat variation. These both, basically what we're doing is the same type of squatting motion. Like I said, the same mechanics. We're sitting back into that chair. The knees aren't going too far forward. We're activating all the leg muscles, the core muscles, everything throughout. And this makes your legs very strong. Keep everything straight. And that's the dumbbell squat. Okay, the dumbbell lunge is essentially the same lunge that we learned before. Except now we're just adding resistance. The most common way that we're adding resistance is just by holding the weights down by our side. Starting off George's feet together. And let's go ahead and do lunges. Let's do all four directions. Okay, let's go forward. Okay, then we'll go with our lateral lunge to the side.

[1:20:10] Excellent. Let's go backwards now. And we'll do a cross back lunge. Okay, so those are four directions. And you'll notice that each one's a little bit different, but yet it's pretty much similar. Let's go back out to the forward lunge again one more time though. So notice when George comes down here, when he lunges. Now George lowered his knee down because that's for what I'm showing you guys. You know, if he holds that there, it actually becomes excruciatingly painful. And so he's taking a little break down here, but normally his knee would not be on the ground. He's just going to be here for a momentary pause and he comes back. The key thing here though is actually how he's putting the weight onto his foot. His weight's not going onto the ball, his foot and his toes. And his knee's not projecting forward. He just steps forward and he lowers down into the heel. 90 degrees. Yeah, exactly. Get that thigh to parallel, then come right back up into standing, pushing off the ball of the foot. And there is, he's back into his position. So forward and backwards and you can go multi-directions. Now do you like doing multi-direction lunges, George? I like it because when I'm fighting in every day of life, you know, you're going multi-direction.

[1:21:15] So it's important that your training reflects what you will perform. And that's the dumbbell lunge. The dumbbell standing press is one of the best strength-building exercises that we have for the upper body. What happens here is we want to maintain, first of all, let's bring the dumbbells up, George, to the rack position. This is what we call the rack position, okay? Meaning that we have them racked up top here. Now, very important here is that we don't want George extending out the spine. We actually want core activation. We want that key theme. We want to keep everything here in place. And then George, let's just press them straight up with your palms facing. That's a basic standing press. Now let's do another repetition with a rotation. That's also an acceptable form of pressing. Yeah, rotating at the bottom. And now let's do a push press, which is an explosive form. Good. And let's do that one more time, George. Show standing press. Now a basic standing press. Just straight up. Good. Then rotating. And then the push press, where if you notice, he looks down as he presses up.

[1:22:19] The reason why he doesn't, you can even do that in your regular presses too if you just want to develop this habit. What George is doing when he does this, he's clearing out more space back here between his scapula, so he can actually get better extension on his arms when he does this. So when I look down, I say, but I don't want to stay looking down. As I lower down, I'll look up. Other thing is, you notice George, he's not doing this. He's not sticking his chest out to try to get his chest involved in all these other muscles. He'll use more weight. He's maintaining good core alignment, which actually makes him a better athlete. He keeps him safe and it gives him real functional strength. It's not an artificial form of strength that we're doing here. He's actually keeping his body and the alignment that it should be in. And then he's using the weight that actually suits his body. So remember, don't try to use a bunch of weight here. Don't let your ego get involved in the lift. Try to use just what you can use with good form. Quality over quantity. Yes, that's one of the most important concepts. You're going to have quality over quantity. And if you get used to doing that, you'll find that eventually the weight will increase. And so with this one, just be, let it go gradually. A lot of times we get our egos attached to the pressing motions.

[1:23:21] Like very few of us, what, how much do you bench press, you know? And would you say that that's really even relevant in a fight? How much you bench press doesn't make any difference. Okay. So one more thing here, just on the press before we, before we wrap it up here is that when you do the push press, you know, that's an advanced variation. When we do this, this requires a little bit more explosion. We're using the legs. We're popping the hips. If any motion, if you find that this is a little bit too ballistic, that you may don't feel comfortable doing it, it's totally fine. The substitute, just a standard press. And that's where we just come up and down or even looking straight ahead. Very basic. So you don't have to do the push press unless you feel you're ready for that. And that's the basis of the dumbbell standing press. Okay. Now let's talk about the dumbbell row. I consider the dumbbell row to be sort of like the yin to the yang or the yang to the yin to standing press. It's sort of like the balancing out motion. And it's a very important motion because we don't really get any type of pulling motion with our body weight exercises.

[1:24:22] So we want to make sure that we include a pulling motion with the dumbbells. The important thing here is you notice when George comes down, let's go ahead and do a couple of stationary rows there, George. Good. One, let's do three here. Two, one more. And three. And you can come back in the standing. Now if you notice when George, when he does his row, he sits back with his hips this way, onto his heels with his chest over his spine. He does not round. He keeps the back in a nice, strong neutral position there. Remember the concept, core activation. It stays throughout. Okay. So the core has to activate. I sit back here. And then I'm in good position. Now this is a very important motion. So we have to remember we try to pour elbows back and we're pulling with our elbows. That activates our lats, our rhomboids, our traps. All of these muscles that make our backs very strong and allows us to do this motion. We have to use those. The biceps, the forearms, everything here, it is activating as well. But remember we want to pull with the elbow. Now George, let's show a rotational row. This is where he's actually going side to side. And let's go and get some spinal rotation going on there.

[1:25:23] Good. Now if you notice it's the same motion. Now he's just alternating arms, but still the same strong back position. The core is activated and he's moving the elbows around the spine. And George, now let's go ahead and go down into the prone position. Oh no. Okay. Actually, I'm going to grab one of these and just do a one arm, one leg row. Yeah. Let's check that out. It's the same type of row, but now he's on, it's much more, this is an advanced variation. Now, if George wanted to modify this because say balance were an issue, let's say you're having a hard time doing that. George, just put your foot down. They're going to try to stay bent over. Good. And row. And you could even brace now, brace your hand and your knee there too, George. Yeah. That gives him more stability. Okay. So that's an easier modification when you see a one arm, one leg and row. And let's do one prone row, George. So put the dumbbells down here in front of you and out into this position. George is going to go side to side a few times. So now he's in that push-up type position and notice he's pulling, he sets the weight down. He's going side to side. My core is working as well. Yeah. This is activating his core to the extreme.

[1:26:24] Now what we want here, George, let's lower down to the knees. Let's say George fatigues and he wants to continue on rowing, but his core got, it's gotten tired. This is a great modification to make. If you find that that type of prone row becomes too difficult, you can always lower down to your knees. That makes it a little bit easier on the core and you can still get that rowing motion in, which is a very important motion. And that's the basics of the dumbbell row. Now let's talk about the exercise upright rowing or high pulling and or I should say because they're not exactly the same, but it's a similar movement pattern. Let's first look at the upright row. You'll notice this is a movement throughout. The upright row is basically George in just a natural stack position, stacked meaning ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Nice natural posture. He's using the trapezius muscles, the deltoids, the biceps, everything here and he's pulling upward. Notice how the elbow comes up higher than the wrist and he's just activating all that pulling up.

[1:27:24] Now that's our basic movement pattern. Now George is going to do a little bit more advanced. George, you can actually just use one. You don't have to even use two here. Now let's do a high pull. Now the difference with the high pull is this is leading into the Olympic lifts. He's using his legs. He's popping his hip, driving with his legs and then using that to help pop it up and it's more of a leg exercise and the arms are just activating towards the top. They're both great variations. Now if you notice that the high pull is a little bit complicated, you can always substitute back with our basic that you saw there, which is just the upright row, whether it's with one dumbbell or with two dumbbells and then if you feel comfortable, we use our legs. And if you notice, George, can we do this a couple more times? I just want to show one more thing here when you do it. And if you notice when George does this motion, look at his spine. His spine is nice and strong. His core is activated throughout and that allows him to connect his legs to his arms. The actual work is more with the leg than the shoulder actually. Yes. That's kind of like with a punch or a kick too, right?

[1:28:24] I mean like almost everything you do, it's more from the hips and the coordination. Our legs is the strongest part of our body. The legs are much more stronger than the arms. So that's why we use a leg for everything that we do. And that covers the basics of the dumbbell high pull or the upright row. Now we're going to talk about the dumbbell clean or the dumbbell power clean. Olympic lifting in my opinion is what we're all kind of building up to with, you know, with athletic training and weightlifting. I think that's the main value of weight training for a fighter. Would you agree? I agree. And that's one of the reasons why I implement Olympic lifting movement pattern in my training because the Olympic lifters are the most explosive athlete in the world. And in my sport, I need explosiveness. So George a lot of times trains with a barbell, but a dumbbell is a fine substitution. Never feel, you know, like just because you don't have a big heavy weight, we can't get the same effect. Because when you think about what we're doing, whether using a barbell, a kettlebell, a dumbbell, whatever it is,

[1:29:28] we're essentially doing a jumping motion. This concept of triple extension, extension of the ankle, knee and hip joint like this. That's what people are doing with it. So George, let's go and jump up. Yeah, let's show that a few more times. So that's what it looks like without really jump off the ground and really exaggerate it. And so if you notice what an Olympic lift is, essentially we're projecting the weights upward, right? With this shrug, with this type of movement pattern, kind of we're jumping up off the ground because we have heavy weights. We don't really jump. A lot of times we stay planted on the ground. Then as I land, I pop my elbows forward and that gets me underneath the weight. So I'm actually putting myself underneath the weight. Then I stand. We transfer basically, we transfer all our energy in the tools that we have, either if it's a barbell or a dumbbell in Olympic lifting, they use a barbell. But we're going to transfer all the energy of the movement in our dumbbell. Yes. So let's go and show it a few times with the dumbbell. Let's take a look at the basics here. So the first thing is this there again, we get ourselves in a nice strong position.

[1:30:30] We notice George will fold over, but keeping the back in a strong position, he'll extend up and he does the catch. So there's a couple parts of George. Let's just go and stress just the, yeah, good. And if you notice, let's do it one more time. Excellent. And what he's doing there, you can go and set the dumbbells down, George. He's extending here. Okay. And remember, as he's extending, it looks like he's just throwing the weights up. But really what's happening is the weights are projecting upward. And as he dips, he punches his elbow forward and he maintains good position here and he squats on, he lands on his heels, then he stands, then he lowers. And if you notice, he's not in a rush. He's not doing this and dropping them down. It's very deliberate and slow because it's the explosiveness that he's trying to capture. He's not just trying to throw the weights around to a bunch of repetitions. He's focusing on good leg drive every time. And another key component to the power clean is coordination. It's very difficult to project a weight in one direction and then drop and switch directions, catch and stabilize.

[1:31:33] So this is sort of like the epitome of athleticism. Yeah. And when you drop down underneath, it's like a free fall. You have to let your leg just like a free fall. You let everything go. So this is one of those motions that you might find almost too complicated in the beginning. And remember, the best way to practice this with no weight, get used to this motion of sort of jumping, landing and punching your elbows forward. Then eventually try to shorten the jump where it's just this. But in the beginning, if you find this too difficult, let's take a look at a fine substitution here. So if it's not going to be the same muscle energetics, we're going to lose some explosiveness. We're not going to get the same coordination factor, but we're training similar muscles. So if I'm not able to do a power clean yet and I'm practicing just my body weight, I can do this when a power clean and a press or whatever pops up in a push press, pops up into the routine. I'm just going to lower down to a squat stand curl. So that's a fine substitution for the clean. Now, if it calls for a clean and press, I'm going to do the same thing.

[1:32:34] I'm going to squat, curl and press. So throughout the movements, you might see that throughout the workout, you might see the need for a clean. There's a substitution. Okay, we squat and we curl. And if it's a clean and push press or a dumbbell power clean with a push press, we're going to come here and press, keeping everything very basic, but still working similar muscles. And that covers the basis of the dumbbell clean. Okay, the dumbbell swing is kind of like a mix. It's a very functional exercise. It's not as explosive or requires much coordination as an Olympic lift, yet you're integrating the legs with an upper body movement. Similar to the high pool, similar to the power clean, you got to think a little bit more simplistic, but it's a great motion. It develops overall athleticism, I think. George, you want to go and pick up a dumbbell and show us how you do it? So you notice George grabs a 30 pound dumbbell, which seems kind of heavy,

[1:33:35] but it's actually not that bad because he's using his legs. Remember, George is very strong, so you might not be out of 30 yet. You might start with a five pound weight, a 10 pound weight, even just your body weight. Now, if you notice, as George is doing this, he takes a little pause at the top, right? And as he lowers down, his core is activated the whole entire time. And he maintains alignment here. He's not collapsing. If you notice one of the key things here is where you look. So if I stay looking straight ahead, as I lower down, I swing up, my spine stays neutral. If I happen to try to follow the weight, I might overextend at the back and hurt my spine here, and I might injure myself if I try following it down. So don't really look at the weight with this one. Just stay looking straight ahead. Nice natural stance. And if you find that there again, you feel the weights getting out of control, you feel you might hurt your shoulder, you just don't feel comfortable going all the way up. You can always play with the range of motion with this, meaning that I can dip a little bit more shallow, and I can swing not as high. So a substitution for this will be as I'm here, just barely moving.

[1:34:39] And then as I feel more comfortable, I can start working my height up, driving my legs down more, to eventually getting into a full swing. The power comes from his legs, not from the shoulder. Don't try to lift the weight with your shoulder. It's all the glute, the core, and the legs. And a key detail of that, if you just want to get that leg drive, is when you go down, try not to push off the balls of your feet, try to push your heels down to the ground. That activates all of these muscles, and it gives you much more power. And that's where the power comes from, from the hamstrings, from the glutes, from the back. And that covers the basics of the dumbbell swing. Okay, now we're going to talk a little bit about the dumbbell get up. We don't have to use a dumbbell, but it's probably the best variation, especially if you're using this at home. Some people, old strong, used to use barbells, used to use all kinds of big, heavy objects, even you could probably even use a human body. Now, the thing about the get up, let's go ahead and show it a few times, George.

[1:35:42] That's entirety. If you notice throughout, George is keeping his eyes on the weight the whole time. That's very important. Don't discount that in this thing, he's just doing it for whatever reason. This is one of the most important details you can learn about this whole entire movement. Do not, at any time, take your eyes off this weight. Don't look at the screen, don't watch us doing it. When you start doing your get ups, the only thing is you and your weight. Because if you take your eyes off that weight, it's very likely it could definitely happen that this weight could come down and hit you. You don't want to get hit in the head by a dumbbell, especially if you're using 15, 20, 30 pounds or more, it can cause some damage. Absolutely. Now, what would you say is the main functional value for you using that movement, George? I would say during my fight, I use a technique called the hip eyes, to stand back up from when I'm under one of my opponents. So that's pretty much working the same muscles throughout? Absolutely, it's pretty much the same pattern. And remember to keep the eyes on the dumbbell.

[1:36:43] The eyes that directed your movement. So when we're going up, keep looking up. Don't look down. Very important, don't look at us on the TV. You might hurt yourself. Now, let's go and try to break down what's happening with the get up. We're using no weight here because we're going to have George go very slow. And this is actually a great way to start learning how to use this. No weight in your hand and just looking at the hand that's up. Now, let's break down what's happening here throughout. So George's shoulders are working, everything's working. Now, his abdominals are working, his obliques are working, the shoulder over here is working as he comes up. Now, this is very important. Let's go and stop here now, George. As George comes up, notice how he goes in the opposite direction of the arm that's extended. He comes up and his left arm, so he's holding the weight with his right hand. If he's looking at his right hand, his left arm is the base support here as he comes up. So this takes some of the stress off the body and it gives it to the structure. Let's stay here for a second, George. Let's come back down. I want to stress leg position. So you notice that when George came up here, the arm that's the post arm,

[1:37:43] being his left arm, is the same leg that's been. This is the same position. We do this on purpose when we do our training because this is what we call the staggered butterfly guard or staggered hooks guard. He's doing this as a very functional transfer into the body. Now, at this point, George has to notice how this knee is up in the air, okay? His foot's down. When he decides to make his move and come up in the stand, he's going to hip-heist up, meaning he's going to turn his hips up. Yeah, and he gets his knee on the ground. And now as he comes up in the stand, he just drives upward. As he lowers back down, he sets his knee onto the ground and he reverses the whole motion. Notice how as he steps, yeah, let's come back here real quick, George. Let's come up. Yeah, notice how when he comes down, he lets his foot flip around and his left arm post onto the ground, then he lowers down elbow onto the elbow, then he goes down to the shoulder. Then he lets his leg straighten all the way back out. So, as you can see, there's a lot of movement going on and you can't discredit anyone move. You have to make sure that each one's done correctly. So, it's very important. This is the most difficult part for people is this, as I'm here, is getting this knee back

[1:38:47] and as a base of support, I want to get it underneath my hip. It's very important as I'm doing this that I don't keep my knee too narrow because then I'll collapse as I try to come up. So, if you find that you can just get to here in this spot, all you feel comfortable with, that's a half get up and that is a fine substitution. So, if necessary, you can come up just to the halfway post. Let's do a half get up, George. You notice the description is a little bit longer because we want to be sure that you're doing this correctly. This is a very important motion. So, as he comes up, you start to drive up and sit all the way up into the post position. There we go. Now, that's a half get up. Let's slide back down, George. So, you go down elbow, shoulder, line straight and then back up again, a half get up. Now, if you notice now here, now if he's going to do the full get up, he's basically going to pull his left leg back underneath of him. There you go. Seconds on the base of support, he's going to turn straight up the body, come fully in the standing and then it reverses the motion. That's a full get up. He's going to come back down to the knee, fold the left leg in, post the left arm, then lower down, elbow, shoulder, flat on the ground.

[1:39:51] And that covers the dumbo get up.
