TITLE: Intensity is My Sanctuary | Arm Day Advice
VIDEO ID: LMP5kT_dmnM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LMP5kT_dmnM
UPLOAD DATE: 2024-10-14
DURATION: 32:49
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:37] Back. We're back in it. Bro split. Full tilt. Um I don't even know if it's popular anymore to do bro split. I think it is. I think it's super cool. I know there's a ton of nuance-y different ways of training that do work. I've seen a lot of people have some success with it. But I am old school through and through. I'm a bodybuilder at heart. I love this I love it. And you're all about to see it happen. We're going to take the trip down memory lane, but in today's time. Uh I'm going back in full tilt with bro split. I'm going to train my balls off. You're going to watch me eat. You're going to watch me train. You're going to watch me grow. You're going to watch the whiteboard workouts come back. You're going to see what works for me, what doesn't work for me. There are things in my physique that I wish were better. Uh I'm going to work on them to pick them up. Um you know, the race to 240 thing last

[01:38] week, me and Ty around. He's in an off-season setting. I am I'm going to make the push. I'm going to see if my body can handle some See if it can handle the training. And we're going to see what happens. Uh the earlier this year, you guys saw me get up to 220, 223, hanging that range. Um had the summer, It super busy, had the GNC launch, all the support from you guys was tremendous. Uh it still is. We got a ton of other cool planned, but um I said in the fall, if everything continued to go good with the companies and my health and my blood work and everything, I'd go back in to see what I was made of, see if the body could still handle it. Well, it's the fall, And uh it's the one thing in my life that I I have unfinished business in, and I ain't getting any younger. I turn 40 in a month. And we'll see what happens. But more or less, the journey is always the fun part. That is the most fun of of it all. The results are cool,

[02:41] but who you become, the people that you meet, the impacts that you have, that's the fun part. And what you guys are going to see is you're going to see everything that makes me me. The food, the training, the style, the the way I do things, uh and along the way you'll see what works, and probably teach you a thing or two. You'll be able to see it happen, why it happened, where it happened, when it happened. Um because today on the internet, you know, everybody has really good ideas. But just because it's an idea doesn't mean that it'll actually work. You have to work to make it work. And with my training, intensity is that's my game, dude. I love it. I thrive in that environment. It just brings me to life. It makes me feel alive. I chase those scenarios. And no matter how old I've got, no matter how many times I've been in a scenario, I still just

[03:44] I gravitate towards it. And arm day, hammer curls, V-bar press downs, dip machine, close grip bench, basic intense I've never been really good at making things fancy. I'm not the most eloquent at speaking. I speak direct, I speak with purpose. I train, I do things with direction and purpose. And even if it's the most simplest task to do, I believe that if you do it well enough with enough intensity, with enough purpose, you will get the result out of it. Now, is that every time? No, you got to be able to move fluidly through some things, but that is my basic fundamental belief with things. That's how I'm going into this. Do the basic really well and build from that. Arm day.

[04:58] The piercing radiant moon, the storming of our June, all the life running through her hair. Approaching guiding light, our shallow years in flight. Dreams are made winding through my heart. Through my heart. Before you know, Your lives are open wide.

[06:00] The beaches give them sight of all the life running through her hair. The spiders all in tune, the evening of the moon. Dreams are made winding through my hair. This is pretty much overall with all of my training, uh but for arm specific because that's what the we're doing. So, I'm a firm believer of a strong warm-up. Meaning like I like to have the sweat rolling before I start my work sets. I take the time on arm day. I literally brought this piece of equipment in just for arm day. Two-handed cable curl, specifically just to warm up on arms. Meathead Uh

[07:01] I like it because I'm able to get such a good contraction on it and I warm up and have a ton of blood and my arms just get super round and full of blood. I like it. I feel warmed up. And I notice that I'm able to get a better contraction right whenever I go into all my work sets. So, I already got a ton of blood in my biceps. I love V-bar press downs, but for warming up, I like to use a cambered bar. So, on warm-ups, I mean, I'm probably going to do sets of 20 to 25 reps with a very moderate to light weight. Um that way I'm getting a good stretch. I'm moving. I also believe very strongly in shoulder mobility. Get a band. Warm up the shoulders, the Y's, the T's, the I's. Just like Dr. Bubba said, my little brother. Um, super important for shoulder warming your shoulders up, shoulder mobility. Um, it's not a bad idea to stretch out beforehand also, lower back, hamstrings, even your ankles. Getting older. Uh,

[08:02] that way just nothing stupid can happen your whole body's warmed up. Again, getting older. But, I love hammer curls. Dumbbell hammer curls are the foundation of what built my arms. My arms are not the greatest body part that I have. They are they're good, but they're not great. So, um, I've had to work very hard at them. I am a firm believer in being very warmed up and then going into an exercise. I love hammer curls, reverse grip curls, and incline curls. I love them because they've done great things for the arm for my arm growth, but I hate them cuz I hate the exercises themselves. I hate reverse grip curls. But, brachialis, thickening of the biceps, you can't you can't say that they don't work. Hammer curls as well. You can do them cross the body, hit more of the brachialis, or you can do them a little bit straight, or like like if we're going straight, cross the body, or like right that in the middle there, get a little bit of both. Um, but during my workout, you'll see me do maybe a couple sets straight and really

[09:05] work on thickening the overall bicep. That's the that's the concept that I have whenever I'm doing this exercise. And but if I cross the body, you're going to see if you take your shirt off and you're getting a little leaner, you'll see the brachialis come to life there. Um, and then I superset. Arm day's always superset. Bicep tricep. Bicep tricep. Bicep tricep. I love it. And I like to warm I like my first exercise to be with the V-bar press down and or V-bar press down or close grip bench. Um, I love close grip bench. I just do It's one of them old school things. My elbow still gives me a little trouble here and there. So, if I do do them, it's only for a few sets, like a few work sets. Every single exercise that I go and do on arm day or, you know, any day, um, one like warm-up into it. And that warm-up still kind of a work set, but I don't really count it as such. It's just I want to go in. I want my body all my entire body to wake up to that exercise, to feel it, and be like, "Oh, okay." So,

[10:06] that way if there is a twinge or there is something, I'm preventing that potential of injury because when I go at this exercise, I'm going all in. Like, that's why I take one set where it's a warm-up, and I'm like, "Okay, close grip bench. Let's feel out this weight. Ooh, I like it. Everything feels good. Ooh, okay. Yeah, this is light today. Ah, it's a little heavy today. Got to be a little careful. Let's warm up. Let's take an extra couple sets, couple half reps, get some pumps in, full range of motion, see if I got the shoulder mobility going, is everything awake? yeah. That way I know I'm ready to rip it. That set that I'm doing there still has a a good bit of weight that someone might call a work set, and that's fine. It's great, but I want to go in with intensity. So, to prevent injury from something bad happening, I look at it and say I should do a warm-up set to get the feel of the weight, but not where it's like 135, and I'm like, "Oh, yeah, 135. That's easy." And I just throw it around, and I'm like, "Yeah, warm-up set." No, no, no, no, no. I want to feel it. I want to make sure

[11:07] it's there. I want to feel it. I go to do incline curls. Dude, you do incline curls with the 45s, it could pull wrong on your bicep, and all of a sudden twinge your bicep tendon in your shoulder, and you're like, "Ah, I don't know what happened." Got to be mindful of these things. So, when you go in, in my head, my philosophy, feel it out because I'm going to get intense. I'm going to do it with purpose. So, uh, you know, obviously you guys aren't here with me. Uh, you know, Aiden's editing, but I'm sure we'll as I'm doing a couple you guys will see it. That way you can get an understanding of every single one. There should be a feel. So, then that next set is the work set, the all-in, you, on top of it. And I usually do two to four working sets per exercise. Depending on the exercise, depending on what it is, how my body's feeling, cuz uh I like to be able to do a little bit of instincting train instinctive training, cuz if I'm feeling something I'm feeling and I'm going to ride with it. If I'm not, I'll might do two work sets and be like, "Motherfucker, I'm just wasting energy at this point." But me

[12:07] being as advanced as I am and very in tune with my body, I understand what that feeling is and I might be like, "Fuck, I should do the incline curls." Or is preacher bench what I'm feeling today? Is it Do I should I do singles or should I do doubles? Maybe a little bit of both. And as I'm going coming to the gym in my truck or as I'm thinking about it the night before or as I'm training, I'm able to move with that and know what's good, what's not, where I should be, and uh how I should be pushing. But paying attention to your body, and that's why I always I'm a big fan of that warm-up, work set, first set of just like feeling it out.

[15:42] Big fan of the preacher bench. I like this one at a 45° angle. I also love a 90° preacher. I have not seen I don't go to many public gyms anymore. But there used to be like a free standing preacher curl that one side would be 45 and the other side would be 90. Do those still exist, Aiden? I don't know if I've seen one. Yeah, like they used to just be like a single and like you'd be able to raise it up. Literally just be able to stand in front of the mirror and one dumbbell or take it over to uh like it was just like a free standing preacher. a little skinny thing? Yeah, it would look like a tripod but with a preacher bench on top. Sick. Um but big fan of preachers. I love the isolation. Um in my head during workouts I generally break down things down into, you know, mass builders versus an isolation exercise. Um and this can be used I manipulate it in a way where it could be used for a mass builder at the beginning of your workouts. Some of my old school stuff you'll see me start off with preachers and go relatively heavy. Uh but just

[16:43] understand the risk and the reason you get warmed up so they don't tear a bicep because whenever you're isolating uh a muscle group and then you start loading on a bunch of weight into that isolation exercise risk of injury goes up. So, be mindful. Again, I'm coming into this. I'm two exercises in and it's like I just want to get a feel for it. This is lighter weight. I place my hands wider. I'll feel the squeeze on the inside of my biceps. I go a little closer. I can feel it on the outside of my biceps. Now, you can do both, but just understand that where your plate where you place your hands also plays a role in how you're going to squeeze on this exercise, especially given that it's an isolation. So, we want to make sure we're get that good squeeze at the top, even if it's just for half a second. And get a feel.

[17:45] And on this exercise, I love to get a good eccentric, that slow negative. And even if you're not getting 15 reps, whenever you're doing negatives, that eccentric is going to play a role in the exercise. So, if you get six reps, and nice slow negatives on each one, it's still six reps, but it's like 12. One up, one down. Also, pay attention to your seat position, or how you're leaning in and standing in into it. That's going to play a role in this exercise. Are you stationary? Are your elbows too high? Are your elbows too high on this, and your butt's too low? Should you raise up, post up, so that you get a nice flat on the back of your arms, elbows in a fixed position, and you're able to drive your elbows in the backs of your arms into this to get a good squeeze on the bicep. All those little bits matter, because

[18:47] the more intense you get with an exercise, the less control you're going to have, in a sense, from a simplistic way to look at it. So, you want to be able to stay in as much control as possible, and be as intense as possible at the same time. Move the weight up.

[20:25] Demo day. Rapid glycogen loader, carbohydrate powder. Amino acids, I'm a big fan of both. Rapid glycogen loaders, I love them pre-workout, intra-workout, post-workout. They are one of the things in sub in the supplement industry that I'm a massive fan of. Demo day is I think the greatest carbohydrate powder on the market. Um amino acids I've taken this combo post-workout for years. Even before I had my own company, I was taking a carbohydrate powder and an amino acid. I was not big on protein post-workout simply because to help bypass that digestive process, so it goes straight into absorption. Rapid glycogen loader, what did we just deplete? A bunch of glycogen from our muscles? And as we're doing it, a rapid glycogen loader can help keep the pump continue to push blood and maybe if you're the bed halfway through your workout or didn't eat enough that day and need that extra umph, rapid glycogen loader, carbohydrate powders, demo day. Um and amino acids, the building blocks of protein. So, post-workout, I would

[21:26] always look, "Okay, if I'm going to go home and eat a meal and if too much protein sitting in my belly before I go eat a meal just causes nothing but a bunch of stomach discomfort, why wouldn't I just take my amino acids post-workout with my carbohydrate powders, 25 to 50, 75 g of carbohydrates, go home, eat a full meal, and just get jacked as fuck." Is it scientific? Damn right it is. Research, I don't know if it is or not. This is just how my head works and it's always worked and I like it and I look like this because of it. Simple

[22:44] I will be as wide as I am tall once again. Few months. I know Hannah started making me overnight oats cuz I asked her and she was like, "How much?" So, she looked up this recipe and it was, you know, like one serving. Mhm. It's like one serving, one serving of protein and she made it it was like this little container. Like this big and she stacked a couple in there and she's like, "Let me know how they are." And I looked and I'm like, "Babe, I need more." How many oats? enough." And she's like she's like, "What do you mean?" I was like, "I need like triple this." Like 40 g. "I need at least two scoops of protein in there. I need I need at least a cup of oats in there." And she's like, "A cup? A lot of these are calling for like a quarter to a half." And I'm like, "Double it, babe. We need more." And she's like, "Well, I'll need new containers." I'm like, "Well, that's why I work so hard so you can buy as much Tupperware as I'm willing to throw away. Go get more." But, yeah, you'll uh as I go through this uh we'll do we'll

[23:47] make sure we do some full days of eating and some vlogging about it all, but food videos. Food videos. Need them. And uh we need to do the GDA video of how I use it, why I use it. I think that's something that in the industry like Comment where you want Seth to go for a a cheat meal. Uh there you go. Yeah, I'm already feeding into the cheat meal most likes on the comment, we're going. Big burger guy. Likes Five Guys. Five Guys Five Guys? Probably has the best burger. Uh double burgers with cheese, uh pickles, jalapeños, ketchup, lettuce. That's my I like jalapeños on burgers from there. Nowhere else though. Yeah. Burgers sushi was another big one, too. Sodium. Soy sauce. But, yeah. I'm working on the new poses, too, because like I like how on this arm you can see the brachialis come to life.

[24:48] But, like and it also but I just need to work on thickening everything up. I'm still I mean, just started, but I like being able to show the detail but obviously need more size on everything. You ever thought of competing, son? Back in my day, I'll tell you what, you guys today are a bunch of Concentration curls like Arnold. I like them as a variation. Big cable guy. Like I said, I love my cables, but I like doing this as a switch up, especially after doing some isolation work on the preacher bench. I like this here, just using a dumbbell, being able to spin it out, stretch out the bicep. As you spin the As you spin this, all I'm doing is stretching it out, allowing some more blood to flow. Get a good squeeze. Squeeze. And pay attention to where you're grabbing the dumbbell, okay? So, we'll grab a light one real quick. Whenever you're doing any dumbbell exercise,

[25:50] any dumbbell exercise, where you place your hand within the dumbbell is going to play a role in how you feel, okay? Whether it is on bicep exercise where if I grab further back on these dumbbells and I go to do an exercise, how I'm bringing it up, whenever I'm here, it's going to feel different on in my hand, on my bicep, on my forearm, everything than if it's right here, okay? It is. All you have to do is sit here and go, "Oh, man. I feel it pull different whenever it's coming down like this versus back here. This pull is different on your bicep." If you have a heavy dumbbell in your hand, you got like the 50s or the 60s, here versus here. Cuz whenever you come up, it's going to pull differently on your bicep and your forearm than if you start here cuz it's not pulling the same all the way up, okay? So, just be mindful of that whenever you're doing it. Is there a right way? Is there a wrong way? I don't know. Maybe for you it

[26:50] might work better if your hands are back here. It's kind of hard to keep your hand your grip here whenever you have the 60s in your hands and by the eighth rep, you're just like struggling to hang on AND AH! SO, JUST BE MINDFUL of that. Try it a few different ways. If I grab the dumbbell back here, pull, I can feel it on the outside of my bicep cuz the weight is distributed a little further forward and I'm actually angling it that way so I can squeeze the out of it. Then if I grab back here, a little more forward on the dumbbell, whenever I come up, I can squeeze the of the inside of the bicep, okay? And then if you grab it, you know, dead nut center, you're here and you can kind of just, you know, overall good squeeze on the bicep. Now, these are all the things that I pay attention to while I'm doing any exercise because you can get jacked, jammed, and juicy using basic You just have to be able to manipulate the exercise and see how it works best

[27:50] for your body. So, as I'm doing it, you'll see me grab the dumbbell on the back side, squeeze the front. I'll do five this way and then I'll do five this way. Or I'll do five with this hand and it pointed back and then I'll grab it this way. I'll do five this way. Okay? Pay attention to how you do anything is how you do everything. So, and as you have something here that's heavier dumbbell, you can feel it pull on the bicep. Then you get a little bit of the body English and squeeze. Not a lot where you're like, It's a concentration exercise where you're going to squeeze the bicep half to a whole second at the top. Squeeze that. Hand placement not just on these exercises, but on concentration curls,

[28:52] but alternating dumbbell curls, seated dumbbell curls, hammer curls. Whenever you're doing any type of pressing exercise, where you place your hands going to play a role because it's going to be the weight's going to be distributed differently. Obviously, grabbing in the center is the most ideal position. However, whenever you go into manipulating an exercise and seeing how your body can feel and how you can get more out of it, that's my fun. That's like why this is my playground cuz even though it says to do it this way, my you know, anti-authority concepts in my head take over and be like, "Maybe you should try this, Seth." It might work, it might not work. The only way to find out is to do it.

[29:59] Hello, my friend. It's been a while since we last met. Feels like forever. Within my heart, I hold memories of a perfect love that you gave to me. Oh, I remember when you were with me. I'm free. I'm careless. I believe above all the others. We'll fly.

[31:47] Arm day. That's it. The workouts in the bio, as always. And as always, there'll be some sick music. And if you didn't look in the bio, all the songs that are in this video, Aiden's going to line up. I have no clue what's going to be in here. But they're all down there. And there's a playlist link. Everyone asks, it's in the bio every time. The bio. The bio is where it's all at. That's like the personality of the video. Like, you know how like ah I can't say that, then I'll get offended. Everything's in the bio. The workouts, the discount codes, the music, the playlists, everything. It's all right there. So, make sure you're in there. Get in there. Head first, full dick, balls deep. Do a good job. Stay tuned for all the cool we have coming. I'm super excited it. As always. Do a good job, slap her on the ass, get ready for a sick AAR release in cinnamon apple pie. Farm fed, Axe and Sledge. Get yours today. Code Aden.
