TITLE: How To Train Shoulders
VIDEO ID: OMNnkYSJ-SM
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OMNnkYSJ-SM
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-01-31
DURATION: 30:39
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] Hi. Do your delts suck? Do you wish that you had big round 3D delts that pop through any shirt that you wear or just look great without a shirt on? Good. I'm here to help. My name is Seth Ferosi and we're going to teach you how to have nasty delts. So, get ready. Shoulders used to be one of my worst body parts. Chest and legs were my body parts. So, whenever I was like 19, 20 years old, those were the ones that were developing the best on me. But shoulders just I just didn't have that round that pop off the edge of my shoulder look. And it kind of pissed me off cuz whenever you look at the magazines of Flex and MD, I'd see just like these guys, is it the steroids? What do I got to do to get there? A bad thing that happened which ended up turning into like how I got my massive great deltoids dunking a basketball. I dislocated my hand and broke the and radius in my arm. And from that I got put in a cast. I was at college. I was being Mr. Ego. I went up to dunk a basketball. I grabbed with my left hand and slammed with my

[01:01] right hand and then I ended up like legs were flying and then I landed on my hands like on on my face and this hand went popped up. I was in a cast and it it all up and I couldn't do anything but legs and shoulders but I couldn't do any pressing. So I sat in the side delt machine and just did sides every day. I either did 30 sets of sides or I did legs probably about 6 weeks and then I got super frustrated and then fixated a piece on my calves so I could actually do some pressing and to have no pressure on my wrist. From that that's where some of my philosophies were generated on volume. And from that I realized that I started filling up with blood. I was able to feel the muscle group. I got much better mind to muscle connection with my shoulders doing them unilaterally. One I'd be over here. and I'd hold it like a static hold at the top or load load the out of the weight and then just get a couple reps and then like the range of motion would be less but I would still continuously feel blood rushing to that area even

[02:01] though I wasn't getting that full range of motion. So that's how a lot of my philosophies were generated. I was like, "Hey, my shoulders got so much better in this short period of time than they did for years of training leading up to that." So I was on to something. Now, the frequency side of things, I just kept hitting them over and over and over because I was crazy and I just wanted to get bigger shoulders. Shoulders really never got too too sore. So, I was like, I can beat the They didn't get sore like my legs or my back or my chest would get sore. My front delts would get tender, but my side delts, it feels like I could do side delts almost every day. So, even like you can't train legs every other day or if you smoke. I could with shoulders. It was just something that I started to realize. Now, does that go with science? No. It's this is a bro science concept. This is anecdotal experimentation and I built one of my best body parts that I am known for today is my shoulders and it came from that point in my life and from that I just continuously learn my body and that's why I always say everybody go learn as much as you can. So, okay,

[03:02] building a shoulder workout. I personally believe that if you are trying to get better shoulders, a three-dimensional round shoulder that is striated in not just a mound of tissue. Like there's guys with huge delts, but you don't see them striated. I think that the volume plays a role there. That separation of the muscle role is played with the volume side of things. It has to be because I have so much all the all my entire physique that is separated as is all based on that concept of volume. So, I'm not saying throw all inhibitions out the window and do quarter reps for everything, but I am saying you need to have a mix of it all. And that's what we're going to go through today. On shoulders or on any actual muscle group that I'm training, I have a warm-up. I do I never started my workouts until I had a little bit of a sweat rolling. I do not believe in a cold start. I think that's a horrible idea. Um, even if you're crammed for time, you should always take at least 10 minutes to warm up. Lube the body up and wake it up. Especially if you're going

[04:02] to go hard as If you're a bodybuilder or aspiring to be one, amateur, professional, whatever the you are, or you're going after a hard workout. Do not go in cold. You're out of your mind. I don't care how young you are. You got to lube it up a little bit. You know, warm it up. I have my, you know, my warm up with my bands. You know, the Dr. Jake, Dr. Bubba, the Y's, the T's, the eyes. Get them shoulders going cuz I just want to wake my body up. I'm going to make sure that there is blood moving to that specific muscle group that I'm that I'm training that day. So that way I get a good connection. First set of my first exercise, I actually have, you know, the sweat going. I actually feel everything. I'm ready to go. Going first rep, connection, connection, connection. I'm in it. I'm ready to go. I'm not like, h, you know, after my third my third set, whether it's all warm-up sets or one two warm-ups and a top set, I'm not like, oh, after my first set, I kind of I'm starting to feel my shoulders. No, no, no, no, no, no. We want to be lubed and ready to go. And I attest that to my physique, taking a uh, you know, a non-

[05:04] stem pre-workout. Hydraulic has always been my It's non- stem. We're going to push blood to that muscle group, get nice and full, and get the feeling and ready to go. It's that fun part. That's the the fun part of training. I like to start every single workout, every single one of my shoulder workouts with sides. Why? I personally, because of that thing that happened with my wrist, believe that you can't do three or four sets of sides and expect your side delts to look like bowling balls. That's not enough. You got to do more. In the beginning, you need to be able to rip through at least four working sets. There's there's workouts that I have where I did six sets of side of dumbbell side laterals with a last set of running the rack. ton of energy goes in there and you'd see me rip off my pump cover and my shoulders are just rounder than a Well, yeah, you just did all that to him. Great. Now I'm ready to go to presses and I'm going to rip through presses and then after presses, I'm going to go into front delt raises, whether it's cables, easy bar,

[06:04] dumbbells, whatever the I'm doing. And then I'm going to make sure I'm hitting rears. I might do bent over rear delt raises. Then after that, I might work into some upright rows and then some shrugs. I'm going to make sure in my in my head whenever I'm doing this, whenever I'm building this out, it is the silhouette is what I'm thinking of. Okay, let's start with that. Your tiny little head, the traps dil. And it's almost like through that silhouette, you can see the depth of the body. And then if the silhouette starts to become more of a person whenever you see it, you want to see that it's not just a mod podge of muscle. You see that it's detailed into the shoulder. You see the you see the shoulder and then all of a sudden you see the striations of the delts and you can see the separation of the front delt the the chest into the front delt into the side delt and the rear delt just pushing over the top from behind on that side delt. So that's what's going through my head whenever I'm trying to do all this. And how do you build such a high quality physique like that? You can't just throw weight

[07:05] around or you can't just do a few exercises and expect to build this incredible uh statuesque silhouette and sil this statuesque physique has to be you have to add some detail to it. And how would you do that? And in my head I was like, "Okay, so if I know volume is a thing, I can't just be a pussy." And whenever I say volume, I don't mean like, "Oh, look. I'm I'm doing light weight." No, You got to move some weight, too. It's going to be moderate to heavy with that moderate repetition range, but then also increase the weight, drop the reps a little bit from set to set, kind of find those sweet spots for each one, and then be like, "Cool, now I'm going to do a strip set at the end to add that intensity and push even harder." So, you might start out like might start out here with like the 30s and then cut the weight in half and double the reps like a Seth set to add that intensifier to really say, "I'm still making sure my my shit's strong. I'm not a But then also be like, I'm going to build this well this well-developed, mature, stripped out physique from the

[08:08] bro science concept here. Not so much of the science and overanalyzing every single thing. We're just building a sculpture, your physique, your artwork. First movement, let's start with side raise, dumbbell side raises, cuz I'm able to move up into that heavier weight. But what I was getting at was I will finish with another side raise. I will finish with some type of cable exercise. So I might do four to six sets here with a nasty strip set and then at the end of my workout I might be like, "Cool, I'm going to go hit two more sets and really focus. I might get a little bit of a lean into it so I get a bigger stretch and come up a little higher because if I get a good lean into it, a good stretch and just squeeze the out of my side delt that I just beat the out of this entire workout. So to get that hard, nasty, grainy, stripped out look, that's what's going on in my head. So I might do in one one workout, there might be 10 sets of sides. And a lot of people be like, "That's dumb stuff." And be like, "Cool, great." But that's some pretty nice delts. I don't give a what any science

[09:08] person says. I love the intensifiers. So, uh, I'm going to do the 60s for as many as I possibly can. The range of motion towards the end is going to die. I'm going to push my self to failure, and I'm going to cut the weight in half. So 60s down to the 30s and then do twice the reps. And even if I'm getting five half reps with them, then we're still reps in my head. So I still got to get double the reps there. But again, even if the range of motion dies, I'm exhausting the muscle. Uh and it's one of those things that you got to find that happy medium between exhausting the muscle and not risking injury. So again, there's just these these levels to it all. But uh put on good tune, let it rip, and don't be a Happy

[10:18] heat. >> >> That's cool. Heat. >> >> See, that's what I mean. The feather quality. You see the side around

[11:24] front side, the rear delt. Even though being big as is awesome, but as a bodybuilder, you want it to be your sculpture. So, it's up to you on how you build it and what you want it to look like. So, whenever I see people doing one or two sets on sides and I look at their delts and they're not feathered, I don't just rack it up into genetics. I'm also like, well, your training style and did and you got huge within a year. Like, I don't know if the quality of muscle was there as well. Again, even working with Tai, like right now in the in the push that he's on right now, we're developing that quality of muscle and he's like, I've never been this round, this full, and feel like I'm coming to life during my workouts because now I'm like whenever I take off my pump cover and I see it, I'm like I was like, look, it's I was like I feel like I'm a like an action figure. Okay, presses. I love Smith Smith presses, dumbbell presses. I do like shoulder machines. I do I I don't hate the hammer. However, I use it much more

[12:25] seldomly than I would a Smith machine or a uh barbell press or dumbbell press. Now, if I'm doing a barbell press, I'm only going to do a couple sets of sides first just because barbell gets a little dangerous, especially if you're starting to push some weight. You better have your together. If you're going over there and putting 185 above your head or two 225, 275, 315, yacked out of my mind eating two anodraws before a workout. Blood flying everywhere. It was awesome. If you're going to do heavy dumbbell presses or heavy barbell presses, you're going to use a lot more other muscle groups, let's say, because you're going to need the stabilizer muscles. So, I would only do a couple sets of side laterals. As whereas if I was doing a Smith machine or some type of machine press where I'm able to just really focus on the overall development of my front delts, working into the sides, I'm able to just really get a strong heavy press. I can go rip through all those. Now, that's from a very general standpoint. You can still do lighter dumbbell presses and lighter barbell presses. This is just very general. Love dumbbell presses. I am a huge advocate for dumbbell presses with

[13:27] a very very high incline but not straight up and down on the uh on the bench. Seated dumbbell shoulder presses were a massive builder in my shoulder development as a uh young pro with he was very big on dumbbell presses for shoulders. But one of my all-time favorite shoulder machines is the total shoulder by Paramount. I will get one one day. You're gonna see it happen. I It's hard to say that one exercise of, you know, some type of shoulder is better than another. Like because like I said, whenever I was coming up, Honey was very big on dumbbell shoulder presses and I was like, "Fuck yeah, dude. It helped develop my delts into what they are." But then uh like my philosophy as I got older, you know, into the like 2016, 2017 whenever I really it was like the next phase of my physique that I uh developed this concept of like lot more sides and you know some type of more of a machine

[14:29] press uh and my shoulders got even better. So it's hard to say one way is better than the other. What I personally believe, and I say this in every video, you got to figure out what's best for you. And that's going to be that's going to take time. So, you can't just look for the quick answer of what's the best thing to do. You got to experience it all. Cuz as I'm sitting here looking, I mean, I'm back into training pretty hard. You know, the appendix is good. I'm deadlifting later this week. When I'm looking at it, it's like I'm still analyzing what's going on. And uh this is when you're like, cool. This is what I get to come and develop and what I feel good about myself. That's why we go home and tell our, you know, tell our wives about or girlfriends about all the cool we did at the gym and they're like, "You, they're interested, but not, but we still tell them because it's awesome because we're proud of what we're building." So, Smith presses, total shoulder by Paramount, and then dumbbell presses. And I like I personally like straight up and down. If I'm straight up and down, I'll have a little bit of an arch in my back whenever I'm like, I already have the arch in my back and can brace myself better here. So, I really like this

[15:31] angle on the incline press for shoulders. Next, some type of rear delt exercise or a front delt exercise. And I think that depends on what sucks on you. So, that way you have a little bit more oomph because also it's empty right there. Demo day. Just take your demo day. Intra workout carbohydrate rapid glycogen loader that just rushes all the carbohydrates into your muscle so you can stay swole and not to bed in your workout. Use code Aen for 20 for 10% off. 20% off. Maybe 20% off for a day or two whenever you get this. You might never know. So, we're going to do front raises. So, with front raises, you can either do dumbbell, you can do dumbbell, plate raises, barbell, uh, easy bar, two-handed cable through the through the legs. On a shoulder workout, I think it's super important to have good tunes on in your ears and just stay focused. I got good lighting. delts are out and I'm coming up and I'm going to squeeze. But I think right here, right here, like right where the top of the dumbbell is just right at eye level.

[16:33] That's where I noticed I'm getting this great squeeze. Yeah. Never up here. Okay. Why? Because I personally think that the sweet spot was the top of the dumbbell being eye level with me cuz I would get pretty heavy with them. Now, I'm not like maybe a couple times. There's times whenever I would be doing the front delts with the 55s or the 60s yakked out of my mind years ago where I'm and I'm getting a good squeeze cuz I want to see the feather. I want to see all the nasty come to life in there and look cool. If I was in an off season getting thick, but whenever I'm training, I'm going on, you know, a cut or getting ready for a show, nasty as Ah, too high. I I mean I could still feel the tension, but it just didn't feel like I was getting the same effect that I did here. So, in my head, that was optimization. I'm up here. I can feel it. I'm not raising a dumbbell that high cuz I also believe that too light of a weight for this long is

[17:35] pointless cuz I want to get the 10 lb or the 15 or the 20 lb dumbbell up this high. Like, no, that's dumb in my opinion cuz I have all this wasted here on a lightweight just to get this top. I don't believe in just doing like, you know, one style that dumbbells are better than barbells are better than plate raises are better than this cuz you can make any of them intense. When I'm here, I'm bringing it up to eye level, right? We're at eye level. Now, look at this. This is too high. The am I doing? I would lean over, make my chest almost parallel with the ground. And then I would, if I'm here, stand straight up. Now, that's where my arm is. So, all I'm doing is hinging at the waist. So, I'm doing cables and squeezing the out of my upper delt or out of my front delt that getting that dumbbell above eye level. I was like, "Fuck all that cuz I'm wasting it here." But having constant tension from this point here, different angles to hit your front delt,

[18:38] your side delt, your rear delt, whichever one, you have to play with all of these different exercises and not be afraid to do so. Even if you do get criticized or somebody says something, but there's a bunch of different ways to handle a certain body part for front delts, dumbbells. love them. This is where the science and I don't agree. We're trying to sculpt your physique into something that somebody may have never seen before. And if we all just did the most perfect quintessential thing, and everybody's so prototypical perfect, we all look the same. But we don't. And that's what makes this all so beautiful. So, front delt raises with the dumbbells, barbell, plate raises, two-handed plate raises, or cables. It's up to you. Supposed to have fun with it. But again, I put this in your third exercise or your fourth exercise. We didn't even get into hand placement on these. And that plays a role as well because of physics. I just keep this neutral grip. It also changes if you turn your wrist over where I grab the dumbbell. If I grab it on the back side and I go up, it's going to feel a little

[19:39] bit differently than if I grab all the way up and lift up. These are those little inches in a workout that can make a difference as you progress in your training because you'll just feel it a little bit differently. Does that feel make that much of a difference? Maybe it does for you, maybe it doesn't. But I believe personally, if you're having a body part and you're trying to be the best that you can, you need to pay attention to every single little detail in there just to see. But again, that's as you continue to build your muscle and as you progress from a beginner to an intermediate to advanced to elite. Just pay attention to all those things. Okay. two exercises for rear delts that I absolutely love and you'll see one of them in almost and you'll see one in every single shoulder workout I've ever posted. Bent over rear delt dumbbell raises or face pulls and I'll explain both relatively quickly. The rear delt is very small but my opinion on the rear delt is it's very difficult to hit. Okay. Simply because usually

[20:40] when people were doing an exercise for rear delts, they have this crazy long range of motion. And early on in my training career, I was like, man, whenever I'm trying to hit it, I'm doing these rear pec deck flies, but whenever I'm doing them, I feel it more in my back. And I would only feel feel my rear delts for a short distance, but I do the whole thing. And I'm like, why am I doing this whole long range of motion whenever I only feel it in my rear delt for this far of that range of motion? I was like, I feel like everybody's crazy or I'm crazy. Started just doing my own and saying, "Fuck what everybody else is saying or I'm reading in magazines." I ended up finding that using a heavier weight with a shorter range of motion, okay, I was able to target my rear delts so much better because the muscle group is so small. And if I made a bigger range of motion, I incorporated other muscle groups that I didn't want to. And then it would take away from the rear delt because it's so small and it's not possible to hit all of them in that

[21:41] range of motion. I was like, I just want to focus on the muscle. I'm able to just nest. I'm able to pull and hit that thing right away just from this small range of motion. And if I did it with a lighter weight, I wasn't able to feel it the same way that I am with a heavier weight. I didn't feel it the same with the 25s or the 40s. That's why I was like, "Oh, I feel it, but not as much." I was like, "So, if I keep going heavier and just targeting the rear delt, it's all hanging there. It's not like I'm a C." Cuz if I do that, it's on my It's in my lats. I'm hanging down. I'm able to that. It's on hit. You see it start to poke over. should be right there. It's not cuz even though I hit it, but if it's heavier weight or if I'm using a lighter weight, I don't feel it the same. So, heavy weight and then I looked at it for whenever I hit him most muscular. You can see the

[22:41] rear delt right there pop over from hitting it. You see all three heads, front, side, rear. If you just did sides, presses, fronts, you might need to do some face pulls or something just to start to really get that connection and then move into this. You don't have to listen to the trendy internet You just come in here and off until you get it to grow. Cuz if you, in my opinion, if you just do two sets of rear delts, your rear delts ain't going to grow. And most people's rear delts suck a fat dick. We're doing this to look cool and feel good about ourselves. Let's not get it twisted. We're not the most functional human beings. I mean, I'm functional and That's the whole concept of that. Doing the functional training and then doing my bodybuilding training. I want to look cool, feel cool, and actually be functional and good. Now, there's people that will grab these like this. It's not good. And do face pulls here, okay? And it's great. I feel them. Not wrong. There's people that here like, and they pull it up. I equate everything to a pose within bodybuilding. I'd lean

[23:42] my head all the way forward and then I would use some heavier weight and pull back on my rear delts. Okay? And I can feel them stretch like crazy. And then I can squeeze the out of them. I'm pulling I'm pulling a lot with my pinkies. I know you can't see it, but you know, from me being able to feel it. People when they do their rear double bicep, they throw their arms up. They squeeze down. I look up. Okay. It's like I'm pulling. I'm going take the rope. I'm going to pull down and then pull up. In my head as I'm doing this as So, if I'm pulling with the rope, it's almost like I'm doing that rear double bicep and I'm able to get that good connection with all those parts in my shoulder. More sides and be quick with this one. I promise. Cables in front of the body, behind the body, straight up and down like I am. Like you can see the great pull. You can see the pull that it's getting. Now, you don't have to be a rocket science or a

[24:42] chiologist to figure out that this feels different in this position than it does in this position. They don't feel the same. I feel them pull on my shoulder differently. Nobody gives a which way you're doing them as long as you're building a shoulder. That's the great part about bodybuilding and building a physique. What did you do to have great shoulders? Well, I did them this way. Oh, that's wrong. No, it's not. I built my shoulders that way. how you come and where you come to. Whether you're coming here, like I said, arm is parallel with the ground. I love it. I feel great tension. I come up so far like I definitely feel it up in this portion. I can feel the squeeze down here. When you're here and it's heavier, you'll feel the pull right there at the tip in the insertion between uh your tricep, your bicep, your brachiialis, and your uh shoulder. >> If I increase the weight, >> I immediately feel it there. You can just see it happen. cuz there's no way I'm getting it up. But I'm like, "Ah, is that a good rep?" No, it's not a good rep. All I'm demonstrating is is that you can feel the difference. You see my arms separate as well. You

[25:43] can see it happen. So, you want to find somewhere in between where you can make sure that you're getting that great that great squeeze from the beginning all the way to the end. But again, you can come up here, okay? You'll feel a different there. If I get this angle or I pull out and I lean into it more, now I can. Same thing with that front delt. I'm able to get that higher range of motion. I've been beating my shoulder up. Let me switch sides. Where I'm here, how much higher it is. My goal is to give you as many different options to grow your delts. You might get six, eight reps and then drop the weight in half and do double the reps. And again, you're just pushing blood, developing, rounding out your physique, giving you that three-dimensional look cuz we're having fun. Don't don't over complicated or think that you have to be the prototypical perfect sciencebased

[26:43] lifter. That's put more fun into it. More bro needs to go into it. You need to be a dude just having fun, living, and actually building the physique that you want. Cuz there's no way that you're going to build your physique in the way that you would like to build it if you're listening to everybody else constantly. Drugs are a tough one. I believe heavy dumbbell shrugs built my traps. Will swear by them till the day I die. But that's not to say that barbell shrugs or Smith machine shrugs do not work. They definitely work. And there's a bunch of different ways you'll see guys do behind the neck shrugs. That's an old school one. Um, you'll see the the shrug bar itself, the one with the the bend here in the middle. Great. Heavy barbell shrugs. Loved them. I noticed a crazy amount of development in my traps once I started doing heavy dumbbell shrugs. And heavy is a relative term to where you are at in your program. Like to be able to let them hang, have that good that good stretch, good grip on everything. Again,

[27:44] you don't have to not use wraps. Whenever you get heavy, I suggest suggest you use wraps cuz we're not working on grip strength. We're working on building your traps to be as big as possible. I'm not perfect on saying we have to just do perfect repetitions. Those are important. I like to make sure I start I start light, do a couple warm-up sets, and then I'll get into ripping some weight. I'm going to kind of pull back with my elbows slightly. My arms get a little bit of a bend in them and I kind of tilt my head forward and I take my shoulders and try and jam them up into my ears. You got to move some heavier weight to get big traps. So, I'm going to be hanging here and I don't just keep my arm straight. I get a little bend and make sure I'm starting to push back and up and I try and shove this part of my shoulder into my ear. Okay? But if I have the lean forward like this here,

[28:45] I'm coming up. Now, whenever I start getting a little heavier, you'll see it more. And I do believe that it's it's okay to have some some rhythm. You know, I'm not cheating where I'm like, "Ah, you're not doing anything right." That's not true. We're just trying to get as much as we can to get them up. This is one of my favorite shots. Like in the mirror, lean. This is an old Arnold shot. This is the one that got me obsessed with like the front delts whenever he There's an old picture of Arnold leaning over a preacher bench like this and this was just feathering and I was like that's the coolest pick I've ever seen. Just cuz I've always found fascination in the front delt like that feather that goes on right there. Like that's wild. It's like you can see through the skin and actually see the muscle. And whenever you're dieted down and have nothing in you, it's even cooler. This shot in front of the like leaning over just exhausted from your workout and you get a cool pick. Some of my favorite picks of me all time is just shoulders exploding, yacked out, trend out of my mind. I love explaining my philosophies and and just

[29:47] little tidbits of information on how you can put that into the gym, into your into your routines just to get a little bit better because the goal here is to become as the the best version of yourself as possible in all aspects of life. And this is one thing that training in the gym has been my just because for decades I was just in a gym trying new and experiencing and developing my physique, helping other people get a little bit better here and there. And that's what, you know, built my YouTube channel. So, I hope you guys learned something. I have I'll put two different workouts in the uh down in the description so that you guys could choose and just try a couple different things. Um, but expect more of this whiteboard workouts, explanation videos, and if there's anything else you guys want to see, drop it in there and let me know. Other than that, thank you guys for all the support. Keep being good Warm it up. Give her a good slap. Let her know you love her.
