TITLE: Stretch for Flexibility
SOURCE: Georges St-Pierre RUSHFIT — DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Rushfit Stretch For Flexibility.mp4
RELEASE YEAR: 2010
DURATION: 39:39
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] Hi everyone, I'm Jacques Sainte Pierre, welcome to my Rush Fit Warmup. This program has been designed by Eric Owens. The Rush Fit Warmup is a multifaceted warmup that uses only body weight motions and allows you to work every muscle of your body in a functional manner to get you ready for the work to come in the rounds. So let's not waste too much time guys, let's go and get started here with a shoulder width stance. I'm going to do some torso twists. So as you notice I want to get my elbows up about shoulder height, they can dip down a little bit that's okay. And I pick a good pivot point on the ground. I want to rotate back and forth. Imagine that my elbows, if there's a line just about going about 180 degrees, if there's a sphere here right, I don't want to go too far. I don't want to go all the way around here. I don't want to injure myself because remember we're just warming up. We're trying to get the body loose, core temperature up so we don't injure ourselves

[01:01] and we're ready for the work to come. The body is like an elastic. If you try to stress an elastic when it's cold it's going to snap. If you try to stretch it when it's warm now you're going to be able to play with it. Now we're doing each exercise for 60 seconds. So right now we have about 10 seconds left and then we're going to switch and go into our next exercise which is a side bend. Let's keep going though guys. Got about 5 seconds. Alright, good job. So now here in our stance we're just going to lean to one side kicking our hip out, reaching over then going to the other side. This is a side bend and what we don't want to do is we don't want to bend forward and then over. We want to keep our body stacked meaning knee, hip, shoulder, everything in alignment. We let the hip kick out to the side and we reach. This is going to be stretching the muscles of the hips and of the lats and this is a very important movement pattern in most functional fitness and in fighting. You have to be able to move side to side as well as forward and backwards.

[02:03] Like every other exercise you start slowly and you try to pick it up as time goes on. Now we have about 20 seconds left in this. You can also work at your own rate. If you find you're starting to fatigue, the form is starting to go away, step back, maybe take a few deep breaths and get back at it. One more seconds guys. Warm up is very important. It prevents injuries and it allows us to have our full range of motion. Okay, great job. Now let's turn and face this direction and we're going to come down onto our fingers, walking out into the plank position and we're going to walk our feet up to our hands. Need us to turn, switch directions and go back in the other direction. This is a great way to stretch all the muscles on the backside of the body. We're also activating the core. We're starting to get things a little bit. The difficulty is increasing here now. So you might find that your body temperature is increasing. That's good. You should be starting to sweat. To apply around this point, maybe within a couple more exercises, the complexity is going to increase.

[03:04] One of the things you might notice, so Victoria if you can, let's do a bent knee modification. Victoria happens to have great flexibility, but if her flexibility wasn't so good, she's going to come up like this. She's going to kind of tuck under and she's going to lower down with a bent knee position. She's going to allow her to get down there on the ground, walk herself out and she walks her feet up. She'll also do it in a bent knee position. Great job Victoria. Okay, about five more seconds guys. Let's try to get one more. Okay, now up in standing, we're going to take a move from Capoedo. Okay, we're going to do the ginga. We're going to go side to side, so it's like a backward lunge. We bring one hand in front, so either your defending hand up a little bit higher towards come up in front of the face and we go side to side. This is a great move of up fluidity. Basically it's a backward lunge. We go side to side and Capoedo has some very effective techniques and this is one of the base moves of Capoedo. I'm sure none of us are very good at it, but still a fun exercise and it's a great variation of a lunge. Quebrera, it's a martial art from Brazil.

[04:05] It's also a style of dancing. This is one of their base motions. It's a great way to warm up with the body. Moving back and forth, we have a coordination here. We're lunging back with one leg and then back with the other. About 10 more seconds to go here and then we're going to do our walk out push up. So five, four, three, two, one. Okay, now here, shoulder with stance. We're going to lower down, squatting. We're going to walk out to the full push up position. Hands underneath the shoulders, lower down, then come back up. Try to stress getting a full range of motion here. You squat all the way down, get your hands on the ground. You walk out to get your hands underneath your shoulders. You don't want them far back. You don't want them too far forward. A good alignment. Lower down, chest to the deck. Press all the way up and back in the standing. Okay, now we're about halfway into it guys. So 30 more seconds. You'll notice when they come back up into the standing position, we want to make sure our

[05:07] heels get on the ground before we stand up. Now let's check out Victoria's form here. So if you start to fatigue a little bit, it's okay to lower down your knees. It's also okay to restrict your range of motion if necessary. If you can't lower all the way down, what you don't want to have happen is lead with your head or collapse in the core. You want to keep the core activated at all times. Maintain good alignment, ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Okay, now back in the standing guys. We're going to come here feet together and lateral lunges going side to side. Try to imagine your feet are running on parallel lines here. We don't want our toes pointing too far out or too far in. When we take our step out too, we want to sit back into our heel. Notice how the trail leg stays straight, the lead leg is the leg that bends. The hands raise up as a counter balance and that's also activating the muscles in the shoulders giving us a full body warm up. Remember functional training is about using all muscles of the body, not just one or two. Halfway there guys. Now if you notice they're not working at a breakneck speed.

[06:08] Breakneck speed is enough to make sure that they're working but yet this isn't really a workout yet. This is a warm up. We're just getting the body warm and loose. If you're finding you're out of breath and you're about to pass out, you probably need to slow down a little bit and do a little bit less repetitions. Find your own speed and figure out what works for you. It's important to make the blood circulate everywhere and every muscle and every joint of our body to prevent injuries. It's very important. Okay, now we're in our stance. Let's lower it down. We're going to walk out and we're going to do our push up with a lateral hold here. Okay, so we're going to come up a lateral plank. We lower down to the push up and back out. Alright guys, let's get on it. Walk out and once you get out into that push up position, you're going to maintain that push up position. So they're all the way down. You open up, you rotate. So notice how they rotate on their feet completely. They rotate. After they hold a five second hold, they lower back down. Good. And if you find that a five second hold is not really challenging, try to hold it 10

[07:10] seconds. Try to hold 20 seconds. Try to hold 30 seconds. Do the best you can. But five seconds usually does the trick. And the key is you don't want your core to sag. You want to keep your hips up in the air. That's going to activate your obliques. Now Victoria, when you lower it down, if you can't do a knee push up, so lower back down, lower down to your knees. Then you're going to come up and then raise off your knees. Yeah, so that's totally acceptable. You can lower it down to your knees in order to do this. Okay, excellent. Now let's walk back up into the standing position. And that's going to set you guys up in the perfect position for your air squat. Okay? So as you're here, you just want to lower down, thighs the parallel, hands up as a counter balance, come back in the standing, all the way up, all the way down. Already start breaking a sweat now. That's a good thing. Now if you notice key things here, their knees aren't going too far forward. The knees initiate the motion, but then they start to sit back and down. They don't round here at the back and collapse to keep themselves up. If you start to collapse, you probably need to shorten your distance, shorten the depth

[08:11] of your squat. You want to push down to your heels. You want to activate all the muscles in the posterior chain, your hamstrings, your glutes. Good core activation, proper alignment of the spine. And there again, you're not trying to do as many reps as possible, you're just trying to do good repetitions, full range of motion. About 15 more seconds. Reading is very important too. Inhale by the nose, exhale by the mouth. Okay, excellent work. Now let's walk out here, okay? And as we get down here, we're going to get in the quadruped position, meaning I want my hands underneath my shoulders and I want my knees underneath my hips. A wide enough base so I have stability, but not too wide. Then I'm going to go opposite knee to elbow, extend, hold, five, four, three, two, one. Then back in, we're going to stay on the same side. Just stay on the same side, everybody. So you're just going to switch opposite knee to opposite elbow.

[09:13] Three, two, one. Keep going and in and out. Five, four, three, two, one. Two more times. Five, four, three, two, one. One more time. Five, four, three, two, one. Now let's switch sides. So get your stance in place, proper base and go. Five, four, three, two, one. Five, four, three, two, one. Three more. Five, four, three, two, one. Two more. Five, four, three, two, one. One more. Five, four, three, two, one. Excellent work.

[10:14] Now let's come around to a lying position, lying face up. And now we're going to do our straight up. So we're pulling our toes back towards us, hands are overhead. We're going to try to sit straight up and touch the ceiling here, okay? And then we're going to lower right back down, right when the hands touch, right back up. We're going to finish off with one minute of this and that will complete our warm-up. Remember this is not a race, this is just a warm-up. The importance of this is the form and it's not the repetition, it's not the number of repetition. It's to be able to break a little bit of sweat and ready to go for a half-dirt, to be ready for a hard workout. That's a very good point, George. And if you notice, George is sweating. Everybody here is sweating. It's a difficult warm-up, but yet everybody is able to talk. Everyone's able to still interact. They're not to that point where they're filled with lactic acid. We're not working out yet. Just getting everything loose and ready. Ten more seconds. Five more seconds.

[11:15] Five, four, three, two, one. Good job, everybody. That complete our warm-up and now we're ready to attack the real workout. Congratulations, everyone. Hi, everyone. I'm George Saipiere and welcome to my Stretching for Flexibility Program Workout with the designer of it, Eric Owing. Okay, guys, what we're going to do here is a program that you're going to look at and just going to think it's a little bit easier than the other ones, and it is. But you shouldn't bypass this or think that it's not necessary. This is the kind of the yin to the yang. This is a soft work. This is very necessary to maintain proper range of motion and to keep the body loose and flexible. So you shouldn't bypass this routine. You should definitely include it in your program. Some of the exercises seem easy and they are sort of easy, but it's more about keeping your range of motion, your joints healthy and functional. So let's go ahead and start off here with our hands on our hips. Okay, and we're just going to start off doing neck rotations, making big circles.

[12:19] What we're going to do is go slow. You don't have to go quick at all. And the whole idea is going in 15 seconds in one direction and then we switch directions. Okay, guys, good. And switch other direction. And we kind of want to hit every joint in the body from head to toe in the beginning. This is just loosening up the body. We've been working out hard all week. We definitely need this. Okay, great. And now shoulder rotations going forward first. And if you notice, I kind of touch my palms right as I bring into the front, or I'm sorry, the back of my hand as I bring into the front. This is important to prevent injuries. Switch directions. Prevent injuries and keep our joint healthy to have a better range of motion. This is very important. Like I said, this seems easy and it is relatively easy, but necessary. Okay, now we have spine rotations.

[13:20] You notice this is the same as in the warm-up. We're going to do it a little bit slower and just try to stress a full range of motion. Really working on all the muscles that allow us to rotate our body around our spine. And this way we just stay going for 30 seconds. The importance of breathing to remember and keep thinking about it. Breathe through the stretch. Okay guys, now we're going to clasp our hands and just rotate. Just like that. We want to try to go in one direction the whole time. Then we'll switch and we'll go 15 seconds in the other direction. This is trying to keep the wrist nice and healthy. This is very important because the number of punches that I throw for... And switch directions. The number of punches that I throw in training is incredible. As with the impact, it's very important to keep that joint healthy. Yes, very.

[14:20] Okay, now let's come here. We're just going to switch and go inside the side. Imagine you're turning your hands up like you're looking at a tray. You can do a little bend in the arms too. This keeps the elbows and the shoulders healthy. Just turn and look. Inside the side. As you're doing great. About 10 more seconds. Good. Okay. Now hands on the hips. We have a big hula hoop. We're going to make big rotations here. Going around. If you feel comfortable, you can go a little quicker. If you want, you can stay moving slow. If you feel a tight spot, you can kind of hang around there for a second. Okay, let's switch directions. We're going the other direction now. Very important to have a full range of motion. Try to go as far as you can as long as it is comfortable. You're not supposed to feel any discomfort.

[15:20] Okay, now knees together, slight bend in the knees and knee rotations. Same thing. We're going in one direction 15 seconds and then we'll switch. What's very important we do is to keep all of the joints healthy. Not just one or two, but all of them. Switch sides under direction. This is a little slow. We find it starts picking up in difficulty as we start hitting the stretches. We have one more here. That's going to be our ankles. We're just going to get up on the ball over a big toe and just try to pivot around there. Same thing, go 15 seconds one side, then other side guys, 15 seconds to the inside. And cold, it's very important. Also people forget about it because it supports the whole weight of our body. Almost 24-7 or not 24-7 but almost half of the day.

[16:22] Switch sides. You'll find if someone puts you in a foot lock and they break your ankle during the fight, that's pretty much it. You can't really do too much. This actually helps the body have a resistance to a joint lock because it switches directions and increases the range of motion a little bit. And this will save you one day in the fight. A lot of knee injuries are caused because of the instability of the ankle. It's very important to maintain that joint virality. So now here we have our feet shoulder-width. We're going to do our fore-bends. It's going to be a little more active now. What we want to do, if you notice when I do the bend, I'm coming with my hips are kicking back away from the center line. I'm trying to touch down. If I need to, I can bend my knees but I want to try to reframe from that if possible. So we're going to reach up and touch down. Touch the hips up, touch the hips down. We're always going to go back to the hips. Go guys and reach up. Touch the hips.

[17:23] Touch down. Up and down. And like I said, I can't stress this enough. This is the soft work. This is very necessary. We all want to do the hard stuff. We all want to do the stuff that makes us sweat, all the stuff that you feel the burn. You feel like you're building strength and endurance, all that. But don't neglect flexibility. It's extremely important. Being on the angle. Yep. This is the inside. This is what they would call the soft side. We train hard, everyone, but we train smart. This is very important. We need to be hard, but sometimes we need softness as well to be calibrated. Very true. You guys are almost there. About 15 more seconds. If you know Victoria, she has good flexibility. She can get her whole palm on the ground. That's great. If you can do that, that means do so. If you need to bend your knees a little, you can do that too. We will find out that you're getting more flexible as the workout goes on because you

[18:26] get more warmed up. And you're loosening up. Okay. Now, let's come here and we're going to go do our side bend, but we're going to exaggerate. Unlike the warm-up, we're going to kind of stick the one side for a few seconds and slowly transfer over to the other side. You just want to go side to side on your own rhythm. If you find you're really tight, take your time. They're kind of hanging out for an extra few seconds. Everybody's got to kind of make their own personal variation of this. Excellent. Very important to inhale as the stretch goes on. Keep breathing. Breathing through it, through the stretch. Now, these stretches, like I said, they kind of build a complexity as we go. And we're almost at the end of this one. And our next one we're going to do is we're going to come into a straddle position. Okay. So, we're going to come right here like this. We're going to try to point our feet just like we're doing our lateral lunge. We're going to try to be running down parallel lines with our feet.

[19:28] Now, we're going to go side to side, but we're going to hold on one side for 30 seconds and then go to the other side. Okay. So, let's start by going to our right side. That means our left leg is going to stay straight. We can stick our hands out. And if you want, there's no reason to force yourself too hard there with your arms. You don't have to fatigue your arms. You can just lower down here and hold. That's totally acceptable. You should feel this in your left adductor. Okay. That's your inner thigh. If you're not feeling it there, you might have to adjust your foot position. If your feet are turned in that way, it might not work. So, we want our feet facing, like I said, parallel lines. Try to run out here a little bit longer. And we're going to come up and go to the other side now. This is a very, especially for me, this is a very important exercise because I got an adductor pulled. Pulled by adductor is one of my competition. And this is an exercise that I need to do every week to keep my joint healthy.

[20:29] This is very important for me. It also helps with kicking, lunging, pretty much everything that you're going to do. Absolutely. Now, let's come back to this middle position here. Okay. And now we're going to go through a single hamstring. Okay. So, we're going to go first towards our left hamstring. You just want to try to come down. If you can tuck your head down to your shin, that's fine, but it's not necessary. If you can just get here, that's fine. Even if here you feel a stretch, that's fine. Try to find the range of motion that you feel the stretch and try to hang out there for a little bit. And just don't forget to breathe. A lot of people forget to breathe when they're stretching and that's not good. You guys have to maintain a good position, but a position where it allows you to still breathe normal and natural. Okay. So now from here, we're going to come up into a neutral position and we're going to switch and go to the other side now, towards the right leg. Just try to relax the muscles.

[21:33] You know, find sometimes if you're not getting enough of a stretch by contracting the muscle opposite. So right now, if I were to contract my quadricep muscle here, I might feel a little bit more of a stretch in my hamstring. If you want a little bit of an extra boost, that's a good way of getting it. Great. Great job, guys. Now, back up to the standing. Now we're going to do a squatting the ductor stretch. Okay, so we're going to squat towards our right leg. We'll go up on the ball of my foot here and my toes are pointed up in the air. You might feel this one in the adductor as well, too, George? Absolutely. After you, this is a very necessary stretch. Sometimes during some stretches, you might, especially if you're a little bit claustrophobic, you might feel like you have a hard time breathing. Try to relax. If it's really a really bad discomfort, just come up and, you know, don't go that far, you know? You have to, it's not good if you feel any discomfort doing this. You have to go to the maximum, but until the point that is okay.

[22:35] And switch. No discomfort. This is something to keep our body healthy. It's not supposed to feel any pain. You'll find once you become used to a range of motion, that's kind of the key, that your body will naturally allow you to go a little bit further each time. Try the force of your actual tear muscle and become less flexible in the end. That's not really a good thing for anybody. Okay, now let's come back here to a neutral position. We're going to interlace our fingers behind our back. And we're going to go forward. We're going to stretch out both of the hamstrings. And we can also stretch out our biceps, our delts, everything here. This one, challenge, drop your head down to the ground. And here again, if you're, everybody here is pretty flexible. So if you're range of motion, if you get here and you feel a stretch, that's okay. Just hang out there. And if you find that you feel uncomfortable with your hands behind the back, you can always just go down here and touch down. This is definitely one of the exercises that I need to work on.

[23:38] My range of motion is pretty bad on this one. Okay, let's come back up to a neutral position. Now we're going to turn. We're going to face to our right, coming down to our left knee. Now you want to make sure you don't leave your knee back too far. We want to kind of bring the knee up underneath the hip. And here what we're going to do is we're going to focus on stretching our hip flexor, which is this muscle right here. And we'll find that all this stuff that we do in functional training is always using the hip flexors, extensors. Our hips are used a lot. And in fighting almost anything in life. So what we want to do here is we want to contract our abdominal muscles and our glute muscles on our left hand side. Okay, we're trying to keep everything here contracted, holding that contraction, keeping the posture upright, and press up with the left hand. If you have tight latch, you're on a micro-forehead, but try to get it straight up and you're going to get an extra stretch there. And try not to lose that contraction. If I lose the contraction, you'll see this happen. Now I feel no more stretch. It looks the same, but really it's not. It's this. I have to contract here, contract here, and that keeps my muscles stretching.

[24:40] And I want to feel the stretch right here in the front of the body on the hip flexor. Just got a few more seconds to go. Okay, great job. Now we're going to lower down left hand to the ground. We're going to come around and we're going to grab our right foot, I'm sorry, our left foot with our right hand. And we're just going to feel the stretch now in the quadricep. If you want you can kind of lean forward a little bit and that will accentuate the stretch, but you don't have to go too far forward. The main thing is just feel a little bit of a pause. You find, you want the flexibility to grab it, that's okay. You can just kind of hang out there and continue doing your hip flexor stretch. But if you can try to grab on and stretch out the quadricep. A lot of people, a lot of athletes, when they finish working out, they always forget to stretch. And to be honest, I've been one of them for many years.

[25:40] So this is really bad because now I need to get back to what I've lost for all those years. I'm not a very flexible guy as you can tell. Okay, so now here we're going right to the opposite side. Okay, so we're going to start with our hip flexor. Try to keep the knee right beneath the hip. We're going to contract the abdominal muscles. Imagine trying to turn your zipper up to face you. So you contract your glutes, your abs, and then we're going to go straight up here with our right hand. Now if you've watched the other DVDs, I'm sure you've seen how explosive George is. And a lot of that has to do with his hip flexors and his glutes and pretty much all of his legs. But he would lose probably a lot of his explosiveness if he got really tight. If he doesn't keep some flexibility, it decreases all of his athletic attributes. Although it's not the thing that makes him explosive. It's one of the components that gives him that ability. All right, good. Now let's lower down the right hand. And we're going to reach behind with our left hand and grab our right foot.

[26:43] And you want to, if you can, to try to align the heel with your leg. You don't want your heel kicked out. You want to try to keep everything closer. And if you want to get a little bit more of a stretch, just kind of lean forward. Not a lot. Just a little bit in the field, right in your quadriceps. In front of your thighs. Okay, excellent. Now we're going to stay facing this way. We're going to put our foot down and we're going to come into what they call downward dog and yoga. But we're going to lace our left foot behind our right foot. And we're just going to try to push our right heel down to the ground. Just going to stretch out the calf of the right leg muscle. If you can, you want to get your heel to the ground. Trying to keep your hips high. And if you find that it won't go all the way down, that's okay. Don't force it. Hang out here for about 10 more seconds.

[27:47] Okay, now we're going to take our left leg, put it on the ground. Lace our right leg behind our left leg and try to do the same thing. We're going to try to work our left heel down to the ground. This one takes a little bit of strength in the shoulders too. But, so you might sweat a little bit as you're doing this. It's a little bit more difficult than the other ones, but that's okay. A little bit of effort isn't going to hurt you. All right, now we're going to put our right foot on the ground. And we're just going to dive down like we're doing a Hindu push-up. We're going to put our hips down on the ground. Roll up, roll up, roll up. We're going to put our hips down on the ground. Rolling over our toes and we're just going to look up. This is going to stretch out the abdominals and a lot of the muscles in the front of our hips. If you want to, you can sort of contract your glute muscles and try to pin your hips down a little bit more, but it's not really necessary. Unless you don't feel anything.

[28:49] Especially after you do the, if you do this stretch, this stretch after working, after working out your abdominal, you're really going to feel something. Okay, now from this position, we're just going to lower right back, spreading out our knees a little bit, trying to touch our heels to our butt. And we're going to try to reach our fingertips away, dropping our head down on the mat. And we just want to try to feel the stretch coming right here down the side of the body on our lap muscles. Some people might feel it in the adductors too, if you sprawl your legs out more. That's fine. But our main emphasis here is sitting our butt back towards our heels. And reaching the fingertips away, head down. Just breathing and relaxing. You guys are doing an excellent job. That is a great stretch for the lap muscle. Okay, now we're going to come around facing this way.

[29:49] And we're going to come up into a standing position here. And how are we going to go into basically our side straddle here, okay? Some people call us a split, you can call it whatever you want. We're just going to squat down. And as we do, we're just going to start to kick our legs out to the side. And no big deal if you don't have high amounts of flexibility. Everybody here is pretty flexible. But we're going to start off by going forward, okay? And I don't want to round the back, I just want to keep my, my basic body in good alignment, try to work my way out here, if possible. Going straight out front. If I can lie all the way down, awesome. If not, if I have to hang out here. And also, if my flexibility puts my legs here, no big deal. We just don't want to collapse here. I want to keep myself nice and upright. And eventually, I should be able to improve my flexibility more and more and more. Okay, now from here, we're going to come up to a neutral position. We're going to turn and face our left leg. And try to direct our chin towards our left toes, point our left toes back towards us. Now, we still should feel an adductor stretch, an inner thigh stretch.

[30:50] But we also want to feel the hamstrings being stretched here as well now. Now, we're trying to breathe and relax. And some people like to say, move with the breath. You hear that Latin yoga? That's a fine way to stretch, too. So when you breathe in, you kind of come out. When you breathe out, you move forward into the stretch. Okay, guys, now we're going to come up to neutral, turn and face the right, and go forward. Remember, pull those toes back towards you. Move your chin towards your toes. You want to feel throughout the inner thighs and the hamstrings. If you want to keep arching your back on the good way, not rounding your back like a cat. There's no way we won't. Yeah, whether or not I can touch my toes is irrelevant. It's more about how I feel the stretch inside my legs. Okay, great work. Now, we're going to come with our feet together. And now the sit and reach. Traditionally, the sit and reach, people just go like this. To touch the toes, I say, good job.

[31:50] I'm not really concerned whether or not you touch your toes. I want to see more of this. I want to see the toes come back towards you so we can track all the muscles here in the front of our shins. Okay, our tibialis muscles, all of this. We want to contract our quadriceps here. We want to sit upright, pulling the toes back. We're going to put our fingertips down and try to push the heel of our palm forward. Done correctly, you should feel a release of these muscles all throughout the posterior chain. All the way from your Achilles, all the way into your erector muscles. If you find you can't even do this, it's just too discomforting. Sometimes people like to do this, just brace. This usually does a great job for hitting the stretch as well. If this is doing nothing, just pushing forward. Okay, excellent. Now, what we're going to do here is we're going to take our left leg and just get it out of the way. So we're just going to prop it up. Traditionally, people do a hurtler stretch for this. That's okay, but a lot of times it causes it to collapse. We don't really want to do that. We just want to set our leg out the way. And same thing, we're going to contract our right leg now, toes back towards us, contracting the quadricep.

[32:54] Imagine trying to put the back of your knee onto the ground. You're just going to do posture upright and push forward. Trying to hold here for about 30 seconds. It doesn't have to be exact. As best as you just move along with us. But if you want to do this on your own, you can hold it longer each stretch. Or you can go a little shorter. That's what it feels comfortable. But 30 seconds is usually ideal. And if you find you have some free time, you want to go back to the whole routine again. That's not going to hurt anything. Okay, come back to neutral. We're going to bring the left leg in, move the right leg out, pulling our toes back towards us, contracting the quadriceps, posture upright. Trying to move forward. There again, we should feel everything on the backside of our left leg releasing. Excellent Victoria. Nice George. You can try to imagine you're pushing in right here.

[33:54] There. And you're trying to lift up throughout. Good. The posture is very important. Yes, it's very important. It's everything like this. Alrighty, good job. Now we can close up our legs here. And let's go and flip around this way. And we're just going to lie down. So we're going to lie down here flat. And what we're going to do is we're going to first do our glute stretch for our butt. What we're going to do here is we're just going to come up. We're going to grab our knee and we're going to pull it up towards our chest. Ideally here, we just want to hold here for 30 seconds. Some people like to bring their head up to the knee. That's okay, but there's no reason to force it here. Our emphasis is here. On our butt. We've been using our butt a lot too. It's probably the strongest muscle in the body. So you have to really be sure if you're working it correctly, make sure you're stretching it too. And from here we're going to make a quick transition. We're going to grab our knee with our right hand.

[34:55] And we're going to pull it across our body on a diagonal like this. Putting our left hand on the ground, we're going to just turn towards our left. We should feel the hip extensors here now stretching. Right here on the outside of our hips. This is a very important stretch. Just try to breathe and relax. Keep your mind focused and try to focus on getting a good stretch the whole entire time. Okay, now back to center. We're going to extend the left leg straight. Now we're going to take the right leg and we're going to pull it into our chest and do the same thing opposite side. So starting off just doing the glute stretch. I guess if you feel that you have a little more energy and you want to work a little bit harder, you can try to touch your nose up here to your knee if it's not necessary. You want to try to make sure you really cup your knee and pull it up high. Okay, now we're going to grab our right knee with our left hand,

[36:00] pulling it across our body. Trying to touch down to the ground if you can't get it to the ground. It's okay. Right arms up to the side. We're looking to our right. Pulling with our left arm. Our right knee over to our left. And we're almost there guys. We're nearing the end. Okay, good. Come back to center. Now we're just going to flip it around real quick. And this is a way I really like to finish my workouts. I think it's just good and it's good to have the release of tension. And it's something that's very important to learn. You'll notice that we're fighting tensions, what fatigues a lot of people a lot of times. So what we're going to do here is we're just going to lie down and we're going to make a fist out of our body, okay? So when I say clench, you're just going to try to cause as much tension throughout your whole entire body as you can. I'm going to say relax, you're going to breathe out and just relax. You're going to take a couple of deep breaths. Then I'm going to say clench, you're going to take a deep breath in, clench.

[37:02] Then I'm going to say relax, you're going to breathe out. And just kind of melt into the mat, okay? So let's everybody take a deep breath in, clench. Relax. Breathe in deep. Clench. Relax. Okay, we have three more of these. Breathe in deep. Clench. Relax. Relax. Two more times. Breathe in deep. Clench. Relax.

[38:02] Here comes our last one deep breath. Clench. Relax. Now just take your time. You can take a few seconds to relax in here. Yeah, you can even take a few minutes if you feel like it. You can stay here as long as you want. Just kind of reward yourself for all the hard work you've done all week. And when you're ready, you can come up and that pretty much finishes the workout. But if you want to stay there a little bit longer, that's totally okay. This is very important because every day my body will receive a lot of impact. Either because of the strike, because of the take down, also the mechanics of the movement in martial art that I'm doing. And it's important to have something that releases all those tensions that I have. So to keep the balance.

[39:02] This is very important to keep my body very healthy. If I would never do that, it would short up my career. These kind of training make my career longer. You know, you keep me healthy and that's why it's so important for me. That's why you guys should do it. It's important. Every time you train hard, we train hard, it's true, but we have also to train smart, which is even more important. Congratulations everyone. And let's go to the next step.
