TITLE: The Fight Conditioning Workout
SOURCE: Georges St-Pierre RUSHFIT — DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Rushfit the Fight Conditioning Workout Dvd.avi
RELEASE YEAR: 2010
DURATION: 1:21:07
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] You want to be a champion, you need to train like one. Let's go, George. Go, go, go. I'm George St. Pierre. Welcome to the Fight Conditioning Workout. Speed, speed. Try to get at least 10 combos in, George. Make sure you lift the knee before your side kick. If you move well, you're not going to get hit. That's the most important thing, not getting hit. Hit, squat, hit. Let's go. 20 seconds. Wow. Feels like a fight. This is your chance to train with me, George St. Pierre. Hi, everyone. I'm George St. Pierre.

[01:04] Welcome to my Rush Fit Warmup. This program has been designed by Eric Owens. The Rush Fit Warmup is a multifaceted warmup that uses only body weight motions and allows you to work every muscle of your body in a functional manner to get you ready for the work to come and the rounds. So let's not waste too much time, guys. Let's go and get started here with a shoulder width stance. We're just going to do some torso twist. So as you notice, I want to get my elbows up about shoulder height. I can dip down a little bit. That's okay. And I pick a good pivot point on the ground. I want to rotate back and forth. Imagine that my elbows, if there is a line, just about going about 180 degrees. If there's a sphere here, right? I'm going to go down a little bit. 180 degrees, if there's a sphere here, right? I don't want to go too far. I don't want to go all the way around here. I don't want to injure myself. Because remember, we're just warming up. We're trying to get the body loose, core temperature up so we don't injure ourselves.

[02:06] And we're ready for the work to come. The body is like an elastic. If you try to stress an elastic, when it's cold, it's going to snap. If you try to stretch it when it's warm, now you're going to be able to play with it. Now we're doing each exercise for 60 seconds. So right now we have about 10 seconds left. And then we're going to switch and go into our next exercise, which is a side bend. Let's keep going, though, guys. We have about 5 seconds. All right, good job. So now here, in our stance, we're just going to lean to one side, kicking our hip out, reaching over, then going to the other side. This is a side bend. And what we don't want to do is we don't want to bend forward and then over. We want to keep our body stacked, meaning knee, hip, shoulder, everything in alignment. We let the hip kick out to the side and we reach. This is going to be stretching the muscles of the hips and of the lats. And this is a very important movement pattern. And most functional fitness and in fighting, you have to be able to move side to side,

[03:06] as well as forward and backwards. Like every other exercise, you start slowly and you try to pick it up as time goes on. Now we have about 20 seconds left in this. And also work at your own rate. If you find you're starting to fatigue, the form is starting to go away, step back, maybe take a few deep breaths and get back at it. 10 more seconds, guys. Warm up is very important. It prevents injuries and it allowed us to have our full range of motion. Okay, great job. Now let's turn and face this direction and we're going to come down, onto our fingers, walking out, into the plank position and we're going to walk our feet up to our hands. And you just turn, switch directions and go back in the other direction. This is a great way to stretch all the muscles on the backside of the body. We're also activating the core. We're starting to get things a little bit. The difficulty is increasing here now. So you might find that your body temperature is increasing. That's good. You should be starting to sweat. Apply around this point, maybe within a couple more exercises.

[04:06] The difficulty, the complexity is going to increase. And one of the things you might notice, so, Victoria, if you can, let's do a modification. Let's do a bent knee modification. So Victoria happens to have great flexibility, but if her flexibility wasn't so good, she's going to come up like this, she's going to kind of tuck under and she's going to lower down with a bent knee position. That's going to allow her to get down there on the ground, walk herself out, and she walks her feet up, she'll also do it in a bent knee position. Great job, Victoria. Okay, about five more seconds, guys. Let's try to get one more. Okay, now up in standing, we're going to take a move from Capoedo. We're going to do the Gingo. We're going to go side to side, so it's like a backward lunge. You bring one hand in front, so, yeah, your defending hand up a little bit higher, George, come up in front of the face, and we go side to side. This is a great move. About fluidity. These days, it's a backward lunge. We go side to side, and Capoedo has some very effective techniques, and this is one of the base moves of Capoedo. I'm sure none of us are very good at it, but still a fun exercise, and it's a great variation of a lunge.

[05:07] Geprera, it's a martial art from Brazil. It's also a style of dancing. Yeah. This is one of their base motions. It's a great way to warm up with the body. We've been back and forth. We have the coordination here. We're lunging back with one leg, then back with the other. About 10 more seconds to go here, and then we're going to do our walkout push-up. So, five, four, three, two, one. Okay, now here, shorter with stance, we're going to lower down, squatting. We're going to walk out to the full push-up position. Hands underneath the shoulders. Lower down, then come back up. Try to stress getting a full range of motion here. So you squat all the way down, get your hands on the ground. You walk out to get your hands underneath your shoulders. You don't want them far back. You don't want them too far forward. A good alignment. Lower down, chest to the deck. Press all the way up, then back in the standing. Okay, now we're about halfway into it, guys. So, 30 more seconds.

[06:07] And you'll notice as when they come back up into the standing position, we want to make sure our heels get on the ground before we stand up. And let's check out Victoria's form here. So if you start to fatigue a little bit, it's okay to lower down your knees. It's also okay to restrict your range of motion if necessary. If you can't lower all the way down, what you don't want to have happen is lead with your head or collapse in the core. You want to keep the core activated at all times. Maintain good alignment. Ear, shoulder, hip, knee, ankle. Okay, now back in the standing, guys. We're going to come here, feet together, and lateral lunges going side to side. Try to imagine your feet are running on parallel lines here. We don't want our toes pointing too far out or too far in. When we take our step out, too, we want to sit back into our heel. Notice how the trail leg stays straight. The lead leg is the leg that bends. The hands raise up as a counterbalance, and that's also activating the muscles in the shoulders. Giving us a full body warm-up. Remember, functional trains about using all muscles of the body, not just one or two. Halfway there, guys.

[07:08] If you notice, they're not working at a breakneck speed. The speed is enough to make sure that they're working, but yet this isn't really a workout yet. This is a warm-up. We're just getting the body warm and loose. If you're finding you're out of breath and you're about to pass out, you probably need to slow down a little bit and do a little bit less repetitions. Find your own speed and figure out what works for you. It's all in the same way. It's important to make the blood circulate everywhere in every muscle, in every joint of our body. With that, injuries, you know, it's very important. Okay, now we're in our stance. Let's lower it down. We're going to walk out, and we're going to do our push-up with a lateral hold here, okay? So we're going to come up, a lateral plank. We lower it down to the push-up and back out. All right, guys, let's get on it. Walk out, and once you get out into that push-up position, you're going to maintain that push-up position. So they're all the way down. You open up, you rotate. So notice how they rotate on their feet completely. They rotate. After they hold a five-second hold, they lower back down. Good.

[08:11] And if you find that a five-second hold is not really challenging, try to hold it 10 seconds. Try to hold 20 seconds. Try to hold 30 seconds. Do the best you can. But five seconds usually does the trick. And the key is you don't want your core to sag. You want to keep your hips up in the air. That's going to activate your obliques. Now, Victoria, when you lower it down, if you can't do a knee push-up, so lower back down, look down to your knees. Then you're going to come up, and then she raises off your knees. Yeah, so that's totally acceptable. You can lower down to your knees in order to do this. Okay. Excellent. Now, let's walk back up into the standing position. And that's going to set you guys up in the perfect position for your air squat, okay? So as you're here, you just want to lower down, thighs to parallel, hands up as a counterbalance, come back into standing, all the way up, all the way down. Already start breaking a sweat now. That's a good thing. Now, if you notice key things here, their knees aren't going too far forward. The knees initiate the motion, but then they start to sit back and down. They don't round here at the back and collapse.

[09:11] They keep themselves up. If you start to collapse, you probably need to shorten your distance, shorten the depth of your squat. You want to push down to your heels. You want to activate all the muscles in the post-to-ear chain, your hamstrings, your glutes. Good core activation, proper alignment of the spine. And there again, you're not trying to do as many reps as possible, you're just trying to do good repetitions, full range of motion. About 15 more seconds. Reading is very important, too. Inhale by the nose, exhale by the mouth. Okay, excellent work. Now, let's walk out here, okay? And as we get down here, we're going to get in the quadruped position, meaning I want my hands underneath my shoulders and I want my knees underneath my hips. A wide enough base so I have stability, but not too wide. Then I'm going to go opposite knee to elbow, extend, hold, five, four, three, two, one.

[10:11] Then back in. We're going to stay on the same side. Now, stay on the same side, everybody. So you're just going to switch opposite knee to opposite elbow. Three, two, one. Keep going and in and out. Five, four, three, two, one. Two more times. Five, four, three, two, one. One more time. Five, four, three, two, one. Now, let's switch sides. So get your stance in place, proper base and go five, four, three, two, one. Five, four, three, two, one. Three more. Five, four, three, two, one. Two more. Five, four, three, two, one.

[11:11] One more. Five, four, three, two, one. Excellent work. Now, let's come around to a lying position, lying face up. Now, we're going to do our straight up. So we're pulling our toes back towards us, hands over head. We're going to try to sit straight up and touch the ceiling here. Then we're going to lower right back down, right when the hands touch, right back up. We're going to finish off with one minute of this and that will complete our warm-up. Remember, this is not a race. This is just a warm-up. The importance of this is the form. And it's not the repetition. It's not the number of repetition. It's to be able to break a little bit of sweat and ready to go for a after, to be ready for a hard workout. That's a very good point, George. And if you notice, George is sweating. Everybody here is sweating. It's a difficult warm-up, but yet everybody's able to talk. Everyone's able to still interact. They're not at that point where, you know, they're filled with lactic acid.

[12:11] We're not working out yet. Just getting everything loose and ready. About 10 more seconds. Five more seconds. Five, four, three, two, one. Great job, everybody. That completes our warm-up and now we're ready to attack the real workout. Congratulations, everyone. Hi, everyone. I'm George Saint-Pierre. Welcome to my fight-conditioning workout. This has been designed by my trainer, Eric Owings. Hi, everyone. What we've designed here is an MMA workout that's different than the traditional cardio kickboxing workout. Being that we go from vertical to horizontal quite a bit, we're actually including groundwork and takedowns. So there will be striking, there will be movement, but there will also be grappling moves and other moves. Now, you'll want to have looked at the foundation movements to have an understanding about what we're talking about

[13:12] and the terminology. Also, take your time when doing this. You'll notice that everybody here might work at a little bit faster rate than what you're used to. Try to find your own rhythm and try to keep the movements coordinated. So always think about having good stance, meaning that the feet are shoulder-width apart and natural. But remember, we're also going to switch stance throughout about every 30 seconds in. In between, we include calisthenics at the end of each round. During our break, so we're actually doing a little bit extra work. But if you feel that you're winded and you can't do it, that's by all means you can eliminate those, but we're going to push through and try to do a little bit of calisthenics in between. So is everybody ready to get started? Yes, sir. Okay, so starting off in our natural stance, okay? I mean left foot forward, right foot back. We're just going to start with basic movement, okay? Going forward, backward, side, and side. And find your own rhythm and just do these basic motions. Forward, backward, side, side. Forward, backward, side, side. This is really the basic of mixed martial art.

[14:13] Movement. If you move well, you're not going to get hit. So that's the most important thing, not getting hit. Okay, very good. Now let's do a stance switch. So we're just going to switch stance and same thing. Forward, backward, side, side. Forward, backward, side, side. And it's very important you show up in a good stance each time. Don't show up at your feet too narrow nor your feet too wide. Always come back to that natural stance. That's home base. You always want to come back to there. Every time you move, you're back in stance. So only move as quick as you can while coming back in the proper stance. It's important to work out both sides. Okay, switch stance. And forward, backward, side, side. Level change. Forward, backward, side, side. Level change. Now we exaggerate the level change a little bit in this one. Maybe a little bit more than what George might do in a fight. Because we're making the leg muscles stronger. You're going up and down. Try to really get a deep squat if possible.

[15:14] And if you have to go a little bit more shallow, that's okay. Excellent work everybody. And switch stance. Same thing. Forward, backward, side, side. Level change. Forward, backward, side, side. Level change. And if you notice, everybody has their hands up. You don't want your hands down. They don't have to be super high. But you want to keep them definitely right in the shoulder line on occasion. Lift them up. One of the good trick to rest your arm while and keeping your arm up is you use your body to hold your elbow. If you see my elbow is closed, my elbow is on my body. So I don't necessarily use all my shoulder strength to give my arms up. Okay, now switch stance. And forward, backward, side, side. Change levels and shoot. Pivot towards the back heel. Forward, backward, side, side. Shoot. Pivot. Forward, backward, side, side.

[16:16] Shoot. Pivot. Continue moving like that. You guys are doing great. And switch stance as you face around. And same thing. Forward, backward, side, side. Shoot. Pivot. Then forward, backward, side, side. Shoot. Pivot. Excellent work, everybody. Remember if you mess up a little bit in the combo, it's okay. It's natural. There's a lot of movement patterns going on here. So you're just trying to find your rhythm. If you mess up, get right back in the stance. Just like a fight. Don't give up. Right back into your stance. Okay, now switch back into the orthodox stance. And now we're going here. Forward, backward, side, side. Sproul. Then back up. Forward, backward, side, side. Sproul. If it doesn't home, we find the sprawl a little bit too ballistic for you. You can by all means just go forward, backward, side, side. Put your hands down.

[17:16] Step back. Step up. Back into stance. That's totally acceptable. Okay, nice work, everybody. Now switch our stance here. And we're going forward, backward, side, side, sprawl. Good. Forward, backward, side, side, sprawl. Now that's when the fatigue starts to kick in. Good. Almost there. Okay, excellent. Now we're going to face here. In orthodox stance, we're going to imagine an opponent in the center. And we're going to circle, okay? So circling, circling, circling, circling. Then we're going to keep circling in switch directions. Circling around. Switch. Switch directions. Same stance. Different direction. Switch. You guys are going to stay in right lead throughout on this one. Just moving around an imaginary opponent in the center. Now stop.

[18:16] Switch stance, okay? So now you're going to go to your south pole and start moving again. So circling, circle, circle, circle, circle. Switch. Almost there, guys. 20 more seconds. Let's try to pick up the speed a little bit if possible. 15 seconds. Switch. Switch. Switch. Switch. Switch. And time. Good job. That brings us to the end of the first round. So five minutes is out of the way. Now we're going to do some extra calisthenic exercises, okay? We're going to do a squat with a kick. This is an exercise George is doing karate, and it's very good to do in between the rounds, okay? So starting off here, four reps. We squat, kick, squat, kick. And now we're going to lower down to knuckle push-ups, pulling our hands off the ground. Victoria's going to do a plank. It's a variation. If you find your arms are tired, it's totally acceptable.

[19:16] And go ahead, George. And he pulls the hands off. Four times. All right. And now we come back in the standing. Try to stay loose. And let's get your body ready for the work that's about to come. We have round two. So the first round was footwork and body movement. Our second round is striking. We're going to work on the techniques of punching, kicking, kneeing, elbow, and the striking component of mixed martial arts. It's like a real fight. In a real fight, you want to measure your distance. You don't want to go right there and try to brawl with that guy. So the footwork becomes very important things right in the beginning. All right, everybody. Great job. Now let's get ready. In our stance, we're going to start with our first combination of round number two. That's jab, cross, hook, level change. And go. Jab, cross, hook, level change. Jab, cross, hook, level change. Jab, cross, hook, level change. Now everything's in a right stance, okay? Meaning our right foot's back, our left foot's forward.

[20:16] Our jab hand's always our lead hand. Our cross hand's always our rear hand. Our hook for these combos is always our lead hand. That simplifies things. Notice how they're getting deep on their level change. Really working those leg muscles. Okay, guys, almost there. And switch stance. And jab, cross, hook, level change. Jab, cross, hook, level change. We want to develop balance. You want to be good on both sides. So once everybody's going to have a strong side, if you're right-handed, you're going to feel more comfortable like this. If you're left-handed, you're going to be more comfortable with south-fall. But it's going to develop balance on both sides of the body, not just to do one side. You want to be able to punch equally as strong with both hands if possible. Okay, everybody, great job. Let's switch it around. Now, our next combination. We have our uppercut hook rear knee level change. Upper cut hook rear knee level change. Yep, rear knee level change.

[21:16] Good. Upper cut hook rear knee level change. Good. Guys are doing great. Yeah, really get deep on those level changes. Try to get a deep squat. Really work those leg muscles. We're exaggerating what we're doing in a real fight, but that's kind of the idea. Make it harder in training. All right, and switch stance. Upper cut hook rear knee level change. Upper cut hook rear knee level change. Nice. Almost there, guys, about 10 more seconds. You're doing great. If you need to take a pause, take your pause at the end of the combination, not during the combination. Okay, now back into our orthodox stance. Okay, now we go hook, cross, hook, rear kick, sprawl. Back up, hook, cross, hook, rear kick, sprawl. For those at home that are having a tough time with the sprawl,

[22:17] like I said, you can always go rear kick, hands down, step back, step up. That's totally acceptable. Hook, cross, hook, rear kick, sprawl. Okay, and switch stance now. So we have hook, cross, hook, rear kick, sprawl. Back up, hook, cross, hook, rear kick, sprawl. If it feels a little bit complicated, take your time. You don't have to kill it on the first time you try this. It might take five times, ten times, watching this DVD to feel comfortable with it. If that's the case, no big deal. Work at your own rate. Okay, now let's come back into our right lead. We have jab, cross, hook, rear kick, check the leg kick. Jab, cross, hook, rear front kick, check the leg kick. So this is a defensive maneuver at the end. So somewhere to throw a leg kick at you, you're defending it.

[23:18] It also develops balance and stability. All good components of fitness. Rear kick, check the leg kick. Good. Jab, cross, hook, rear kick, check the leg kick. Okay, and switch stance. Here, jab, cross, hook, rear kick, check the leg kick. Jab, cross, hook, rear kick, check the leg kick. As you're doing great, about 20 more seconds on this combo. Mmm-hmm. You know, it's how George hits his hand out there too. That's a defensive maneuver they add in tie boxing. That's a good addition if you want to do it. Okay, now back into our stance. Three movements. We're going to go jab, roundhouse, side kick, pivot back. Jab, roundhouse, side kick, pivot back. So we get a little bit of a rotation. Then we throw the side kick. The whole idea here is if you miss with the roundhouse,

[24:19] your opponent closes in, you hit him with the side kick. This takes a lot of balance. It might take some practice. And you also might have to adjust your height. You might have to do a roundhouse low and the side kick low. There again, that's totally okay. All right, and switch stance. So we're here now. We have jab, roundhouse, side kick. Come back. Nice. Make sure you lift the knee before your side kick. Lift and push. That's it, Mike. You know, Mike's flexibility isn't the greatest, but he's still doing the technique, okay? That's what we want. If you have the ability to kick high, that's fine. It's not that. The height is the form. Very important. And time. All right. So that's the end of round two. Striking components being covered. And now we're going to hit our calisthenics, okay? So the same thing. We're going to do our squats with our kicks. So squat, kick, squat, kick, squat, kick, squat, kick. Then down into the knuckle push-up position.

[25:20] Arms by the side. Victoria's doing the plank, which is totally fine. And go ahead and go, George. Down, hands off. One. Down, hands off. Two. Down, hands off. Three. Down, hands off. Four. All right. Good job. How are you feeling? Feels good. Really, my heart rate is coming up now. It's going to keep coming up because now we're going to go into round three, which is the striking to the takedowns. We're kind of starting to mix everything together now, right? We're getting the mixed martial arts happening. So this is going to be a little bit different because we're going to incorporate level change, sprawling, shooting, slamming, and uchi-mata, which is a judo technique, okay? So let's get ready. Let's get in the stance, starting off with our basic jab cross level change, okay? And go. Jab cross level change. Good. Now, it starts off simple, but we build into it, okay? This is one if you feel you have it down, you may work a little bit harder, and maybe on the other one's a little bit more complex.

[26:20] Maybe you have to slow it down and get the feel for it. Good. Almost there, guys. And switch stance. Jab cross level change. Jab cross level change. Feeling my leg burning. Oh, yeah, it's all the squats you're doing. Let's push through it. Now, 15 seconds. That's good for everyone. Try to pick up the pace a little bit. Yes, sir. Okay, guys, almost there now. Jab cross level change. Try to keep working. Then we're going to go into our jab cross shoot, okay? Let's get two more. Let's push through it. And time. Okay, now back into our stance, we're going to go. Jab cross shoot, pivot, jab cross shoot, pivot. Okay, let's go, guys. Shoot, pivot around. Jab cross shoot, pivot around. Notice how there's a little bit of a level change on that shot, too, guys. And then they pivot around.

[27:20] Excellent. Notice how they're always pivoting towards the back heel. Okay, that calls you to stand in the same stance when you come around. That's what we want. Okay, and switch stance. And same thing. Jab cross shoot, pivot towards the back heel. Very good. Remember, we're building in complexity here, okay? So keep going, guys, about 15 more seconds on this combo. Ha! Then we're going to introduce the lift and the slam into this. And change up the punch combo coming up. Okay, so about five more seconds. All right, now into our right stance, we have cross hook, shoot, lift, slam, pivot, cross hook, shoot, lift, slam, pivot. Let's go. Lift, slam, pivot, cross hook. Shoot, lift, slam, pivot, cross hook. Shoot, lift, slam, pivot, cross hook.

[28:23] Cross hook, shoot, lift, slam, pivot, cross hook, shoot, lift, slam, pivot, switch stance. Now okay facing back to the front. Okay we're going to face this way and cross hook, shoot, lift, slam, pivot around. Work at your own pace. What do you feel comfortable with? And notice that slam we brace right here. We lower down to the squat, we brace on our arms. That's it. If you feel you have it try to pick up the pace. So notice there's like an extension. Very important. Then this way. Very important. Changing level everyone. Cross hook, change level, do not get hit. Going under the punches. Okay. Now back in the stance here. We have elbow, elbow, back step, uchi mata, all the way around. Full circle now. All the way around. Good. Elbow, elbow, back step. That's the uchi mata right there. That's a judo throw. Notice there's a lot of balance and stability taking place there.

[29:24] Way to work guys. Kick good and switch stance. Okay guys that's it. So remember you have elbow, elbow, back step, kick up and pivot around. Elbow, elbow, back step, kick up, pivot around. You might find that it's very hard when you switch sides. It's normal because your brain is not used to work equally both sides. And then you can be out of momentum a little bit. And naturally people favor one side. Okay guys and now back in the stance. Here we go. Let's pick it up now. Okay. We have uppercut hook, sprawl. Uppercut hook, sprawl and go. And remember our variation for those at home having a tough time with the sprawl. Here we go. Uppercut hook, hands down, step back, step up. You're still getting that horizontal vertical change. It's causing the heart rate to raise.

[30:24] They're getting the work out if you're doing that. Almost there guys. And let's come up. Switch stance. Uppercut hook, sprawl. Uppercut hook, sprawl. That's it George. Good. Nice Mike. Victoria. Almost there. It's finished hard. 15 seconds. 15 seconds. I'm trying to get at least 10 combos in George. Good. Two. Let's go. Three. Good. Push, push, push. Good. Five. Four. Three. Two. One. Time. All right. Great job. So that completes our striking to the takedowns. Okay. That's the end of round three. Now we have, coming up here is our calisthenics. Okay. So we're here in stance. We're going to squat, kick, squat, kick, squat, kick, squat, kick. Down to the push-up position on Victoria's case, the plank position.

[31:24] And let's go down. Hands off. One. Down. Hands off. Two. Down. Hands off. Three. Down. Hands off. Four. Good. Completes. Very unique. Round four. You've probably never seen this before. If you guys have never done jiu-jitsu, we are incorporating jiu-jitsu. We're incorporating groundwork now. The basic movement patterns. Okay. Each one's going to be 60 seconds. We're going to be on the ground throughout on this round. Okay. A lot of core strength. A lot of hip movement. Let's go and get ready. Lie down and take our spots. Okay. And now we're here. We're going to extend one leg. Right leg up. So round four is starting off. We have our hip escape. Right. Going side to side. Stay where you're at. Just move side to side. And go. So this right here takes a lot of core strength. What they're trying to do is they're trying to take their body from being straight to

[32:26] a 90 degree angle back and forth. Moving the hips out. This is called the hip escape in jiu-jitsu. Well, basically this is one of those movements that in order to do this, you have to have a strong core. You have to be able to move your body. There's a lot of leverage too. So notice how they get onto their side. There's sort of like some lateral components. There's obliques working, abs working, the hip muscles, the glutes, the hamstrings. They have to pull you back in. We're pretty much using the whole body. And they're switching side to side. So as you have it, you can pick up the speed. You can work faster or slower. Just take your time and try to do it correctly. Yeah, start feeling my oblique now. Guys, about 10 more seconds and we have our armbar abs drill coming up. So keep working. You're doing great. Now for the armbar abs, let's lie down. We're going to post our right foot on the ground and rotate. Remember, we keep our shoulders off the ground throughout. So it's almost like we're holding an abdominal crunch. And you want to try to keep moving. Notice that I'm going down like in a sphere of 180 degrees.

[33:29] My head's moving all the way side to side. You'll find your abs really start burning on this one. To be a good grappler, you have to have a strong core. And if you want, you can keep your arms right here in the middle, just like you're holding an armbar. This is really different than the other round. This is more an isometric tension in the core of our body. Working the core really much. It's really different. You could feel a different tension than what we have done in the previous round. You guys are doing great. About 15 seconds. If you find you're getting very fatigued, you're going to just lower down and hold in the middle and then continue on. But try to stay at it. Now we have five more seconds. Then we're going into the Kimura sit up. And let's go. So Kimura sit up. Going side to side. Like I'm locking on a Kimura. A Kimura is a very famous shoulder lock. And you'll see a lot in MMA. This can be dumped in any position, but you can definitely do it from the guard position.

[34:29] It's actually one of my favorite locks. Going side to side. And try to rotate the spine. If you find this a little bit too difficult, you can still imagine doing the grip and do a crunch. Just like this. You're going to bring your wrist up and grab. But try to do the full sit up if possible. Guys, you're doing great. Now that is really uncomfortable, but keep going. That's what we need. That's the key to being a good grappler. You have to have a strong core. About 10 more seconds to when we're going to bust into the triangle choke. So let's go. Five, four, three, two, one. Arms to the center. We're going to come up and grab. Up and grab. We're going to try to touch our feet to the ceiling. Then lock on that triangle grip, which means one foot under the other. It's going to come down.

[35:31] Switching side to side. Try to get up on those shoulders as much as you can. If you find that you don't really have the abdominal core strength, you're just fatigued from all the work we've done before. Just doing this. Okay? And then try to raise up a little bit. It's fine too. But try to get all that up on your shoulders if possible. Almost there, guys. About a minute and 20 seconds left. Okay? Let's try to push it out now. Let's go in. Let's go in. Let's keep going. Good? It's fine. If you have to just do the motion, then when you can, if you can't, try to go back into it. If you can, just a few times. Good? Guys are doing great. All right. And our most complicated here is our hip-high sit-up. Okay? So, we sit up and we hip-hist. Sit up, hip-hist. Going side to side. Now, you guys keep working at your own speed, okay? And I'm going to break down this movement for those. You should have watched the foundation section, but just a quick one.

[36:33] Look. I lift up, kick through. Come up. I lift up, kick through. Going side to side here. Lift up, lift my hips up, kick through. Almost there, guys. 20 more seconds. Try to pick it up now. Okay? Let's pick it up. Let's go. This is a movement that keeps somebody from holding you down on the ground. If they try holding you down, it's going to get you back up on your feet. Almost there. 10 seconds. Let's go. Push, guys. Push. 5 seconds. 3, 2, 1. Okay. Great work. So that brings it into round 4. That's the groundwork. These guys can tell you that really works to core. It fatigues all the muscles all throughout the body. And now let's get ready for our squats with our kicks. Okay? Let's get it, guys. 4 reps. Squat, kick. Squat, kick. Squat, kick. Squat, kick. Good.

[37:34] Down to the push-up position for Victoria, the plank position. And go up, down. Hands off. 1, up, down. Hands off. 2, up, down. Hands off. 3, up, down. Hands off. 4. Alright. Now we're almost there, guys. So that was in to round 4. Round 5, we're going to combine everything. We're going to combine striking, movement, groundwork, everything, alright? Championship rounds. Yeah. Exactly. This is the championship round. We're combining everything. So we're going to start off with a jab cross. We're going to step off. We're going to throw a kick with our back leg. Then we're going to pivot around and go the other side. One more round, everyone. Let's go. Let's go. Let's go. Let's go. Let's go. In stance, okay? Jab cross. Step off. Kick. Pivot. Jab cross. Step off. Kick. Pivot. Now, everybody stay within your own sort of area, okay? So there's not going to be a lot of movement. But you are going to move around a little bit here. So you make sure you have a cleared out area. Watch out for obstructions if you're doing this at your home. You don't want to kick a table or anything.

[38:35] Make sure you always have a clear field of vision when you're kicking that there's nothing in it. It's very important to not be in linear, everyone. Someone who is linear, it's someone that is easy to hit. Okay, now here straight ahead, right? In our south ball stance, we're going to go jab cross, step off. Kick. Then we pivot, okay? Jab cross, step off. Kick. Pivot. We're always pivot towards our back heel. That's what we always wind up back in our stance. Cross there. Five, four, three, two, one. Down on our knees, okay? Standing guard pass with two punches. We always put the knee down to the leg that stood up. Two punches. Stand up, two punches. Go back down. So two punches down, then back down. Remember, the knee that stands up is the first knee that goes down. Then you switch sides. And the whole idea is once you get good at this, try to get as many reps as you can.

[39:38] Going up and down as much as you can is going to really get those calories burned. It's going to get you in much better shape. I would say that's the thing that fatigues fighters the most in an MMA fight. People have never fought in an MMA fight. It's that vertical to horizontal. Going down and up. It really tires out the body. It's so different. About 15 more seconds. You guys are doing great. Yeah! So true with last round. Last round. Five, four, three, two, one. Now we have our end fighting. We have elbow, elbow, knee, level change. Elbow, elbow, knee, level change. Let's go. Time to start picking it up. We're almost at the end. Good. Good level change each time. Elbow, elbow, knee, level change. Nice there. Bout to switch sides.

[40:40] Let's go. Push it out. Three, two, one. Okay. Switch. Other stance. Elbow, elbow, knee, level change. Try to come right on that level change. Right back into your elbow. Try to connect it all together. 15 seconds. Good deep squat. He's in a good position. Five, four, three, two, one. Switch stance. Now we have jab, front kick, sprawl, knee. Okay, let's go. Throw that knee. Good. Back into stance. Jab, front kick, sprawl, knee. It's like if someone shoots in, you sprawl, you come up, you try to throw a knee. Almost there. Now let's push it out, guys. Jab, front kick, sprawl, knee. Jab, front kick, sprawl, knee.

[41:40] Think speed. Speed. Speed. Three, two, one. Switch stance. Now here's Southpaw. Jab, front kick, sprawl, knee. Try to really throw that knee forward when you do it, too. That's it. Almost there. 15 seconds. 10 seconds. Let's go. Push, push, push. Five, four, three, two, one. Down here now. Let's go. The scramble. This is when you work at your own pace. We have full rotations and we have half rotations. Okay? So our half's here. A full's all the way around. Notice we stay just on our feet and our hands. So everybody's working at their own speed. I'm fresh so I can do it. Try a little bit quicker. Come on, George. Try to keep up, buddy. Let's go. Yes, sir. You try this. Keep moving.

[42:41] That's the key. Full rotations and half rotations. Let's go, George. Get after it. Good job, Victoria. Mary, the butt doesn't touch. Feet and hands. Come on, Mike. Let's move. 20 seconds. Ha! Let's go, George. Go, go, go. 15. Butt doesn't touch. Only the feet and the hands, okay? Stay up. Keep moving. Don't stop moving. 10 seconds. Come on. Push, push. Five, four, three, two, one. Okay. That completes the workout. We're not going to quit yet, right? We're going to finish up with the calisthenics. Let's go. Let's get in the stance and squat. Kick. Squat. Kick. Good job. Good job. Good job. Good job. Good job. Good job. Good job. Good job. Squat. Kick. Squat. Kick. Squat. Kick. And down in the stance. Victoria the plank. George the push-up. And lower down. One. Hands off. Two. Hands off. Three. Hands off. Four.

[43:41] Hands off. All right, everybody. Great job. Wow. Yeah, and that's- Feels like a fight. And that's the whole idea. What we're trying to do is we're trying to bring to you guys at home a workout that simulates exactly what you're going to see. We have up, down, we're moving around, we're kicking, punching, kneeing, elbowing, incorporating the basics of grappling, different components that really forces your body to get the metabolism up, burn calories, you become more fit, and also much more coordinated. There's a lot of stuff going on. We just did a workout that combined dynamic and isometric tension. So this is important to train like this, especially when you're fighting mixed martial art. And it's the best way to get in shape. Being isometric and being dynamic at the same time. This is the ultimate workout. Congratulations, everyone, at home. Congratulations. Nice workout. Excellent. Good job. Super, everyone. Great job. Just finished a workout. Now it's time for the cool down.

[44:42] The cool down, it's very important. We're not going to do a long cool down sequence, but the exercise is pretty much what we're doing is resetting your neuromuscular system so that you can go back into your daily life without having your muscles cramp and tighten up. We're really going to stress a lot of the muscles around our hips, okay? That's where we did a lot of work. Also, our lats, our shoulders, our chest. Pretty much the whole body. We're going to do a little bit of a workout. We did a lot of work. Also, our lats, our shoulders, our chest. Pretty much the whole body, but we're going to do the most effective stretches that we can do in the shortest amount of time. This routine should take no more than five minutes, five, six minutes, okay? So let's go and start down here on our left knee, right knee up, okay? What we're going to do is we're going to stretch the hip flexor so I'm going to contract my abdominal muscles trying to tuck my glutes right up here up underneath me, trying to tilt my pelvis under then I'm going to reach my left arm straight up in the air, fingertips pointing out towards the left. I should feel the stretch coming right in here. Now we just want to lift our chin up while maintaining this contraction, right? Looking straight ahead, contracting in the abdominals, glutes, stretches right up here

[45:46] in the front. If the arm goes forward because you have tight lats, try to force it up there in the air, okay? We have about 10 more seconds. So let's hang in there. Good. We really feel the hip flexor stretching here. The hip flexor, exactly. Okay, great. Now we're going to come up. We're going to turn and face the other way, lower it down to the right knee. Take your time here now, okay? Let's go ahead and set everything in position so we're going to contract the abdominals and the glutes and press straight up. And we're holding here for 30 seconds. Now 30 seconds is pretty much the minimum here. We just want to do at least 30 seconds to make sure we stretch out the body. But if you find you're enjoying this, don't be afraid to go back through this routine. You know, do it one more time, two more times. As much as you want. These are great stretches. You really can't get enough of these. There is a lot of benefit to gain from stretching. Okay.

[46:46] Now let's come up here. Now you can do a butterfly stretch which Patrick is going to demonstrate or you can just lower right down here into the side straddle. Everybody's flexibility is different, but if possible, we just want to try to split our legs out here, keep the posture upright, then we want to go forward. You see the variation that Patrick's doing is working the same muscles. We're trying to stretch the adductor muscles right here in our inner thigh, okay? What I'm trying to do is I'm basically just pushing out so as George and we're trying to go forward, if we can, we want to lie down flat here. And holding these stretch for 30 seconds. I remember when I used to be a kid, I used to go all the way down. Now as I'm growing up, getting older, it's impossible to do the same thing because I didn't practice enough. Okay, good. Now let's close up here. Leg straight ahead. Now what we want to do, we just don't want to touch our toes. We want to pull our toes back towards us, contract our quadriceps, sit nice and upright,

[47:48] fingertips pointed down. We're pushing forward with the heel of our palm. If you find that to be too difficult by going forward like this and you just, it's way too much, you can just do this. Brace your hands right here by your hips, push up, try to keep your posture upright. Still pulling your toes back, still contracting your quadriceps and just trying to eventually lean forward. Once you can break 90 degrees going forward, you can probably take your hands off and push forward. Really good for the posterior chain. I'm straying, towel, over back. This is what you need to do. Now let's turn to our right. I'm going to kick my left leg around here, bring my right leg in. Now if you notice, I stick my knee straight out from my hip and I form a 90 degree angle here, a 90 degree angle here. Now what I want to do is I want to try to go forward, put my head all the way down to the ground. Everybody has a different flexibility level though.

[48:48] So the key thing is to try to lean toward your left on this stretch. If you're left legs back, lean toward your left. Even if you have to stay upright. If you can lower down all the way, that's great. If you're right here, that's fine. This is for the extensors. This is for the muscles on the outside of the hip. You're going to have a lot of jumping, kicking, all those motions. We've really worked those muscles. Pretty much anything functional, you're using the extensors and the flexors. Now let's rotate around. This is kind of cool. We're going to lean to our right and swing to our left and we come right back this way. Take your time getting into position though. So again, you want your left knee in front of your left hip. You want to try to create a 90 degree angle here and 90 degree angle here. And same thing, try to lie forward. And if you have to, you don't have to push forward. You don't want to feel any type of tearing or a really strong pulling. Just a slight pull in the muscles. The muscles that we're trying to feel are the muscles right outside here. Some people might feel a little bit up in the back.

[49:49] You should be feeling it all over. Some people might feel a little bit of hamstring. For the most part, you want to feel it on the outer part of your left hip here. Trying to lie down. Always a side that you're more flexible than the other. That is completely normal. Okay, now we're just going to kick back and through underneath. So we're in the quadruped position. So if you notice, we start out here with our knees right underneath our hips. Right? Now what we're going to do and our hands are underneath our shoulders, we're going to send a strong foundation. We're going to extend our right hand forward than our left hand forward. Now what I want you to do is drop your butt back while keeping your fingertips out there. Try to touch your butt to your heels and trying to get your armpits down to the ground. Once you do that, you're trying to inch your fingertips away as much as you can. And when we're doing this, we want to feel the stretch coming right down throughout the lats. Okay? Some people find that they spread their knees out here. They also get a adductor stretch here as well. That's good. You just get more flexibility in there.

[50:51] I happen to have a loose adductor, so I don't feel anything in the adductor, but I have tight lats. This really stretches my lats every time. You're really lucky. Me, I'm tight pretty much everywhere. Okay, guys. Great. Now we're going to come up here into this kneeling position. What we want to do is we want to put our knees together, our heels together. We want to sit back here under our butt. We're going to interlace our fingers behind our back here. The most important thing is that I start to straighten my arms. That's more important than how high they get. That first they get straight, then I retract my shoulder blades, meaning I try to pull my shoulder blades together. Once I do that, I raise up as high as I can, and I want to feel stretched throughout my biceps, my deltoids, my pectoral muscles, all of that. There's almost an infinite amount of stretches, but we don't want to spend all day stretching. You guys just did a hard workout, so we just want to hit some of the ones that really get the body back to where it was before you did your workout. Good, Patrick.

[51:51] You know, George is very tired here, so this is a great stretch for him. Absolutely. Everybody else has good flexibility. I should do this stretch more often. Don't be scared that if you do something that you're not good at, that's me. You need to work on it. You can see this stretch. I'm pretty bad at it. That is something that I should put more time into. Okay, buddy. That's time, and that concludes our cool down. So you have to remember that the cool down, although it seems like it's easy, and it's almost like it's the part of the workout that everyone wants to forget to do. We did all the hard stuff, and we warm up because we want to get ready for the hard workout. Then we do the cool down. But sometimes we forget to do. Remember, don't forget the cool down. It's actually going to allow you to, it's going to help you to recover and to come back so you can be consistent, work out on a regular basis. It's very important that you do all parts of the workout, and you try to be as consistent as possible because that's what leads to progress. If you just, you know, come in on occasion and you'd like do like maybe a round or two, and then, you know, you skip a few days, you're not going to see the results that you're looking for. The results are going to come through consistency. That's the most important thing, and the consistency is given to you by allowing your body to recover

[52:52] properly, which is why we do the cool down. And also the cool down is not only physical. For me, I use the cool down as a way to change my mind. I start from being the athlete, George St. Pierre, the fighter. When I work out, I'm the fighter. I'm a martial artist. But the cool down allowed me to make the transition by being the fighter to the everyday normal guy. So it's more than an actual workout. It's also the changing of your mind. Bringing your mind back into what it should be in everyday's life. Great job, everybody.

[53:57] Hi, everybody. What we're going to do now is we're going to go over some of the foundation movements of Mixed Martial Arts. That for the Rush Fit program, George and I designed. It's basically the basics of Mixed Martial Arts, which you're going to see. Obviously, we had to simplify things a bit, but you're still going to get an idea for how it functions during the exercise program and also in actuality. Like if George were in a fight, how we'd also use the techniques. So you're going to see the exercise application and the real life application. Focus on those moves because we're going to be working with it during the workout. So we're going to talk about fighting stance.

[55:02] During every workout that we're going to have, we're going to have to have fighting stance. A good fighting stance is just as wide as your sole shoulder. You're going to step the foot behind, 45 degree angle, ends up. Very important, one of your hands is there to cover your chin and the other one is there to cover any other attack, further attack. One thing that is very important that our weight, it's basically 50-50. Like Eric would not have any problem of moving his body. He will keep his mobility because his weight is 50-50 on his stance. Which is very important, let's say I'm facing my opponent and he's throwing punch at me. Let's say he's throwing punch and he's too far and if I stay here, I could get punched. If I lean back a little bit or going to the side, I can avoid it. So it's very important for me that I keep my stance just wide enough that if I move with my upper body, I just don't lose control of it.

[56:03] So it's very important to keep my mobility, to have a very comfortable position that I can move and slip any punches or kick or anything I want and keep my hands up. So that's the main thing. So another thing very important, when you switch stance, I don't want to see you jump up in the air. It's important to stay as close as possible to the ground. When we switch, we go fast and we stay close to the ground. Switch. I don't want you to do this because you can get caught in the air during the movement. So when Eric switch, as you can see, he stays as close as he can to the ground and he's just do the same thing, but on the other side. And that is the basic of the stance. The basic of forward and backward motion is very simple. As we keep our good stance, the first leg that will move is the front leg and then the

[57:09] rear leg will follow. So when we go forward, move the front and the rear leg just slip behind. If we decide to go backward, we do the opposite. We move the rear leg and the forward leg just follow. If I'm facing Eric right now and I'm coming forward, you want to back out. If he's coming back, that leads us to the lateral movement now. Same thing. If we're having the same, the good stance, if we're moving on the right side, on our right side, the right leg will move first and the left leg will follow through. Going left, same thing. The left leg move and the other one will follow through. If I'm facing my opponent and I want to cut the ring, I want to cut the movement and follow him. If he moves, I have to follow him as long as he stays in front of me and in my range, I can punch him. One thing very important as you're moving, try to not change your level.

[58:10] It's very important you keep your eyes, you know, you always squat down a little bit in your position. I don't want you to do this too much while you're moving. If you were going backward, this is not good because you're losing your balance. It's important to stay the eyes at the same level. You keep a better stability and ready to attack. The pivot motion, it's part of the footwork as well. We're having a fighting stance and we decide to pivot. We're going to go in at a 45 degree angle with our rear leg and step on the side. And then once we do that, we're going to turn our stance facing our opponent. There is the other way to, like, let's say someone is attacking me in the back and I need to face him. And I know he's coming. I'm going to use my rear leg, pushing and facing him.

[59:13] So the first one, let's say he's jabbing me, going to the side, ready to attack him. The second one, I know he's coming, fighting and ready to face him. Our primary attack, it's called the jab. When I jab, it's very important, the transfer of weight going to my feet to my two knuckles. When I jab, I make a forward step, like so. And then I come back right up. When I face my opponent and I decide to jab, I target the point of his chin. As I'm stepping in, I land my two knuckles on his chin and then I'm stepping back. The rear cross, it's a very powerful punch. It's a knockout punch. We use all the body motion into it.

[1:00:16] When we do a cross, it's very important to pivot with the rear leg on the ground. We go on the tippy toes and we, all our weight start from the back of our heel and going in our two knuckles right here. And we twist our body and keep the other hands up. Cross go like so. And we put him back. When I'm facing my opponent and I land a cross, I target the point of his chin. Here, transfer my weight all the way to my two knuckles and then I come back. The leading hand hook, it's a great attack. It's a very powerful punch as well. It's very important. Imagine yourself crushing a cigarette on the floor with your front leg. When you throw the hook, it's important you put all your weight on your front leg going back. And as you're stepping back, you twist your body in a motion like so.

[1:01:16] And your two knuckles and your arm should be in a 90 degree angle. When I throw the hook, I try to go through and I keep my eyes on my target. Then I come back. If I throw the hook facing my opponent, it's important. Same thing. I transfer my weight twisting like I'm twisting a cigarette on the floor. Go through and I keep my eyes on my target and then I come back. The rear uppercut, it's a very sneaky move. I'm in stance. And then as I'm throwing the uppercut, I'm going to use the power of my hips. And I'm going to put my foot on the tipito of my rear leg. Use the power of my hips. And I pass the point of the chin and then I'm coming back. If I do it in front of my opponent, it's very important that I squat down a little bit.

[1:02:23] Transfer my weight past the point of his chin and then I'm coming right back. I use my legs. The power of an uppercut or any other punches come from the legs. It doesn't come from the arm. The rear vertical elbow. It's a great attack when you're in a close range. So it's as the same motion as the uppercut. I'm in fighting stance and I'm going to use the same motion. I'm going on the tipito of my rear foot. I use my hips and my body and my legs to use the power. If I do it in front of my opponent and I'm in a very close range, I'm going to use my legs to throw the elbow. Very important. I pass the level of his chin going up and then I'm coming right back.

[1:03:28] The front elbow. It's a good attack to use when you're in a close range of motion. As the same motion of a hook, of a front hook. I'm going to try to punch over my shoulder. So I'm squatting down in a good stance position. When I throw my elbow, it's the same thing I use my foot. Like I'm crushing a cigarette on the floor. I'm going to try to punch over my shoulder. My two knuckles are facing me to make the ball of my elbow to come out. It's very important the other hand too. You can keep on top of your head to protect yourself against your opponent's elbow. So when I'm facing my opponent in a close range of motion, I use the elbow punching over and I protect myself all the time. If you would try to throw the same elbow as me, I would be protected.

[1:04:38] Regarding the combos, there is an infinite possibility. Normally we use the natural motion of our body. Our body naturally can go side to side and produce by the same way a lot of power. It's the same thing when we hit. Normally I set up things with my jab. It doesn't mean I have to do it all the time, but normally a jab is a good way to set up things. Then from the jab, I can set up my right hand, my hook, my uppercut and the possibility are infinite. For the rear knee, it's a good close range attack with the legs. Very important, when I hit with the knee, I point my toes to make my knee sharp like a knife. You need to think about a knife. It's the same thing.

[1:05:38] Like the knee, it's like a knife. It's a good analogy to make. When I'm coming with the knee, I push with my rear leg and I protect me with the front and the same arm will go down and this motion will give me power. So as I'm lifting my knee, I push my arm down and I protect myself. The hips are coming forward, then I'm coming back down. If I do this motion to hit an opponent, same thing. I'm going to come back here and then put it back down. Front kick is one of the great techniques that you can use if your opponent is a little bit further away. Hit your opponent with the ball of your foot underneath the chin. It's very important that you keep your toes up all the time to make sure you don't break

[1:06:39] your toes. Same thing that I do with the knee. I'm going to use this arm because I'm kicking with my right leg. I'm going to use my right arm to go down and give me the motion, give me the power of it and my left arm will stay up to protect me. Very important to lift the knee first and then I extend my leg. So when I kick, I push with the rear leg, lift my knee, kick and then I come back down. When I use it to hit my opponent. Now the run-outs kick called mawa shigiri. That's how we call in karate. I'm from karate martial art background. So this kick comes from the side. This is the, all the power comes from the hips. And when I kick a mawa shigiri, my heel will point my opponent. So I'm here and I use the same motion but sideways.

[1:07:41] Then I use with every kick and every knee. If I kick with my right leg, my right arm will go down but I keep my left arm up to protect me. So when I kick, then I can put down on the other stance position and then come back. If I hit my opponent with it, mawa shigiri, run-outs kick. Here, then I can step, I can hit with him or just stepping back. The side kick that we use in the workout, it's a defensive side kick. It's like a counter attack. It's normally used after an attack and the opponent or opponent tried to counter us and we use that as a defensive weapon. Even though it's a defensive weapon, it could be very lethal. So we're going to use with the rear leg. We're going to come up, lift our knees, and then we're going to kick.

[1:08:43] Lift our knees as high as we can and when I'm going to hit my opponent, my heel will shift and point my opponent. Then I'm coming back and put it back down. Normally in our workout, we're going to use the side kick as a defensive weapon, like I said. I'm facing my opponent, I'm going to try to hit him with a run-outs kick. He's going to step back and try to counter me and that's when the side kick will come into play. I'm going to run-outs kick here. Sometimes your opponent can try to hit you to the legs with a run-outs kick. One of the defense that we'll use in our workout is to check the kick. There is a method and mojito that we use to check the kick. When fighting stance, when the kick is coming, we're going to raise our leg.

[1:09:43] It doesn't need to be raised too high or toes will be pointing outside. And our rear arm will go cover the face of the opponent at the same time. And I keep always my other arm up to protect myself. So when the kick is coming, and then I'm putting it right back down. If my opponent is hitting me with the run-outs kick the leg. And then I'm ready to counter attack. Level change is used to avoid striking of our opponent or also to put an opponent on the ground. Let's say I'm facing my opponent and he's having a drive. He's coming towards me either with a left hook or it could be with a right hand. It doesn't matter but he's really coming fast. So I won't have to step in because I know with the speed that he's coming

[1:10:45] he's going to get an impact with me. So he's coming to hit me, just do a level change. And from there it's either and I go for the grappling or the upper body clinch. Let's say my opponent is coming with a big hook. I drop down and remember it's like a free fall. You don't really squat down it's like a free fall. Hop as fast as you can. The hook is coming hop and as I'm going up I can be ready to counter. But that's a good defensive way to not get hit. One of the good ways to bring the fight on the floor. If one of if an opponent tried to hit us or even if he's just then still in front of us it's called a shot. We can use the shot to set up a double leg take down or a single leg take down. But it's a good way to bring the fight on the floor.

[1:11:48] If I'm facing my opponent right here I want to put the fight on the floor. I'm squatting down, change my level and I step into it. From here I can put him down easy or I can just decide to close the distance. So we shot in and then after we put our opponent down by performing a slam. If I'm in fighting position and I decide to perform that technique I'm gonna first change level. Get in, left and then using his body to put him right down. A great way to prevent a take down it's called a sprawl.

[1:12:49] If Eric decided to shoot into my legs I just throw my leg back. And now I'm having a good a good way to prevent the take down and not end up on the bottom and have to fight on the floor. I got a way to defend if our opponent decides to close the distance and try to bear ag us. It's called a Uchi-Mata. This is a judo technique. The way we're doing it in the workout is like so. We pivot with the front legs and we bring our rear leg in the same level as the front legs. Then we bend down and lift the leg and we could just come back down to our natural stance. The way we perform it is this technique in real life. In real life if one of our opponent decides to grab me by holding the wrist doing the same motion

[1:13:56] but just putting a little bit more art into it. The hips escape is one of the most important moves in grappling. Every move on the ground in grappling comes from the hips. So the hips escape is like so. I'm laying down on flat on my back. One thing very important is I post my foot on the ground turning into my side. And I'm going to try to push my hips back by using this leg as far as I can. Then I can come back in my in my natural position. That's how we perform this move during the workout. But in real life this is quite different. There are many ways to use a hips escape.

[1:14:57] Let's say my opponent is in side control position. I can use a hips escape to put myself in a better position. Like now he's having all the advantage. I can use the hips escape to put me back in butterfly guard or in full guard for example. Like so. The hip ice, the way we do it in our workout, it's a little bit different than the way we're going to actually do it in real life if someone is on top of us. In the workout it's a little bit harder actually. We are actually in butterfly guard. We stand back up by stretching our legs, posting the arm behind and lifting the other legs.

[1:15:59] We stand back up like so and we kick our leg through. In real life this is a different thing. We use the hip ice to get away from our opponent, to stand back up. Ferec is on top of me, same motion, I stretch my legs, post my arm behind, pushes that down and kick my leg back. And then I'm back in standing position. The umbar, pay attention to this. From the guard, I'm with Eric Ngowing. I'm going to show you first how it will be done in real life. So you will understand the the mechanic of the move a little bit better. Let's say my opponent has his arm right on top of me. I'm going to grab his tricep and hold his wrist to the arm that I want to attack.

[1:17:01] And I put my foot in the hips and pivot my body in 90 degrees and lifting my other legs as high as I can and putting pressure to to create a distability on my opponent. Once I got this, I can easily pass my leg over his head and break his arm. The way the way we're doing it in the workout, it's a little bit different. But we use the same same concept. Put our foot on the floor. We imagine we put our foot on his hips. The only difference is it's in the floor. We use the same motion 90 degrees, pass the leg over the head and we can break his arm. A great attack that you can perform from the guard. It's called a kimura, one of my favorite arm lock.

[1:18:04] It's actually a shoulder lock. You can break the rotator cuff of your opponent if you're doing it well. If I'm in the guard, my opponent put his hand on the floor. I'm going to grab his wrist, put my foot on the floor, keeping my knee tight, reach around, grab my arm wrist. And once I come back down, I'm going to give myself an angle of 90 degrees and put my leg on top of his back to not let him be able to move out of the way. When we perform this technique during our workout, we use the same motion. Our foot is on the floor, grab the wrist, we'll go over the top and we'll grab our own wrist. And we'll come back down. Triangle choke, one of my favorite attack from the floor when I'm on the bottom.

[1:19:09] It's very powerful. If you're doing it well, your opponent can pass out. In real fight situations, let's say I'm on the floor, I grab my opponent's wrist, I push one of his wrists through and I lift my butt as high as I can, try to hook his head. When I have his head, I'm going to figure four of my legs, like so, and push his head down and squeezing the triangle. When we perform this move during our workout, the motion is actually the same. We are on the side, we go up as high as we can and we figure four of our legs. Then we come back down and we'll go on the other side.

[1:20:11] Standing guard pass, we're going to see that in our workout. In real life, it's a little bit different. I'm in the guard of my opponent. I'm grabbing his wrist, I'm going to stand back up. I can punch him there and from here he's going to open his legs. I can, as I want, go on the side or decide to go back down on top of him. During our workout, we're going to do it in a different way. It's going to be the same motion. We're on the knees, stand back up with two legs, punch down and come back down with the same leg that we came back up in the first time.
