TITLE: Total Body
SOURCE: Body Beast (Sagi Kalev) — Beachbody DVD program (local file, no public URL)
SOURCE FILE: Total Body-ipod.mp4
RELEASE YEAR: 2012
DURATION: 40:13
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (small)
======================================================================

[00:00] Log into TeamBeachBody.com to get the most out of your workouts. Visit the online super gym. Log your workout to track your progress. Find workout buddies to motivate you. And by logging your workouts, you'll have a chance to win cash or prizes with the super gym and the Beach Body Challenge. So log in now. Total body. This is where you sculpt your body. This is when you do circuit trading. You work your lower body and upper body. You work your legs, then you work your back. You work your hamstrings, and then you work your chest. You work your shoulders, your triceps, your biceps. You know what? That's how you burn fat, increase muscle mass, and get more energized. So let's get to it. Let's be stuffed with total body. 2-1

[01:02] Total Body It's his beach total body. We're gonna beast you up. Toe to head all the way, baby. Ready? Let's start with the jaw. There you go. Come on. Total body. We're gonna work it off. We're gonna bring it home. Keep going guys. There you go. There's my buddy Brian right there. Yeah, and Nick Let's go. Whoo five four three two out Rotate your shoulders. There you go circles right there. Chest up. We got to warm it up. There you go and Four and three and two and we're going backwards guys. There you go nice and slow Have fun with it. Let it go. We got four three two. We walk into a plank Walk hold step up. That's one walk to the plank hold it step up

[02:08] two There you go stand up number three Relax and here we go Job in place bring your knees up a little bit higher right there. We got a warm up There we go. We're about to start. We got 15 reps pull up. You ready guys? Ready follow me. Come on Nick on the floor if you have limited equipment Watch my buddy Nick right there Brian. We got 15 reps. We're moving right after that to push up Are you ready to go? Let's do this. So you know one two and go 15 come on There you go. Watch this his leg on the ground is lifting his chest off the floor and He's bringing that all the way back. There you go right there. The band's going all the way back I want to keep your chest up. You got to give me everything you got for 15 total reps You got three more. There you go. Come on Nick. Don't stop two more

[03:12] There you go last one. That's one. Let it go drop 15 push-ups right there on the floor. Come on guys Piece of cake. Piece of cake. Come on one two and go down up. You got 15 Push pull whatever he takes. This is beast workout total body all day long Nick right? All day long. Come on five four three Three two one we're going right to squat. Let's get some lightweight. There you go 10 10 that's for you. That's for me. I'm gonna hold it. I'm gonna there you go right there You good? Good. All right. Let me step you to the front watch this you got 15 I want you to pick as heavy weights you can So we got 15 and look at the beast. He's got 10 reps and 10 turns. All right one two squat Squat up squat up there you go

[04:16] Nothing right. I want you to go 15. You see that he's got 10 pounds You go as hard as you can for 15 reps if it was too easy Next round we got two rounds on this next time you go up three Two good Nick keep your chest up last one drop drop the weights crunches on the floor Come on there you go right back right there one two we got 15 easy punch up remember Just imagine there's an apple underneath your chin and you crunch up and you go down You stretch it you squeeze your abs working upper lower Everything is working. You're doing good. Don't want to go five. We're going on the four three two and last one come up rest Not a lot of rest 30 seconds. We're gonna go round number two 15 bring it on all the way

[05:17] total body All right, Nick Ready Loving it. Let me move the way we gotta stay safe. We're gonna keep the form and remember we gotta have fun Total body beat up one two go come on Bring it 15 I Wanted to make sure that you are letting the band to stretch that way you have a full range of motion all the way in and out You work in the back all the way from the back of your shoulder to your lower left watch that Why you got 15 don't let it go keep going whatever you got three two Last one good for us to the push-ups whoo the beast gonna do it with you come on 15 are you ready? Let's go come on guys do this one two and down one two three with me guys four five six seven eight ten five four three two and twat

[06:21] Pick some heavy weights now. You know where to go. That's it. What do you got Nick? I got some 40s All right, he's got some 40s. What do you got Brian? 35 you see that serious weight from ten he went to 35 That's what I'm talking about 15 all day long one two beats up down up down Up nice to the side watch his feet right there close grip straightforward Loots out chest up Down up down up doing good perfect one. I love that four three two Last one drop the weight Back to the clutch. Come on buddy What you're gonna do when the bees gonna go after you that's right you ready one two go 16 to bring your feet closer right there and make sure that's nothing touches right there

[07:21] Are you having fun yet? Yes, sir fun right there bounce on it for Three come up to come up last one you guys doing great rest Perfect. Good job guys. This is it bro next incline press Both arms bend over low on the bench Get some water get some water Right it down right it down whatever you take whatever it takes Do it again do it again. You ready? Are you ready? Ready. We're ready. This guy's sleepy. I hope you're not come on in contrast 15 This is it guys total body upper chest take some weights. Oh you got some weights. Good job. All right one two Be stop

[08:22] print if you don't have a bench watch it controlling it all the way down slow up Make sure it's not moving Nick. I'm more concerned about how you do it and how much you do it because you can always Go back and lift more weight if you write it down, right? five four Squeeze your chest up pull it there you go two more up last one best one drop it buddy Turn around pick the weight lean forward chest up rose 15 reps All right, you're pro. I want you to sit higher watch this guy I want your chest to be right on top and your feet and your knees hugging the bench so it's not moving You got it. Yeah. All right. Let's be stuck. You don't have a bench watch Nick I'm a little bit higher. So you have more range of motion right there. Are you safe? So good Feels good for your own doubt one two go up

[09:25] Nice bring it high real high. I want to go right there on the lap right there lower back working You see his rumboi his middle back squeezing all the way to the top right there His middle shoulders drop your chin down right there, buddy. You don't want to strain your neck You just want to work their upper body back right there. You're doing good for three two One more good drop the weights Get two sets of weights we don't reverse lunges guys reverse lunges Step back step back alternating. You know the drill 15 hard You good no no no no no take it down and Grab some beast weights. I know you can do more than that Yeah This is not that show that was the other show these way. Yeah, be sweet. That's right

[10:26] You want results this is total body these workouts. This is not playing around. This is serious All right now he's working you ready go one two come on beat up reverse Alternating you got 15 each side you going to the limits. Whatever he takes buddy Whatever it takes in this moment right now. You want to see good. You want to look good You want to know what it takes? Well, baby. Here we go. Watch that Nice Stable keep your chest up. I like that Form make sure your knees are not passing your toes you work in your glutes You work in the hamstrings you work in the quads everything the legs lower body upper body We are gonna get there. I promise you guys come on buddy. All right Nick You don't have to say much Tell me how you feel I enjoy net Isn't it awesome? There you go, and we're going down to three

[11:28] There you go left and drop On the floor Twist twist 15 each side. Are you ready? Let's do it. All righty then and twist Twist twist. There you go. Just like that working the side right here. Don't leave we work in the abs We making sure we strengthen the core over your body because you know what? That's the connection from upper body lower body if you don't have a strong core You can't connect you can't get results you're gonna get hurts and we don't want that we got four there you go Three and done guys. Good job. You know what's coming next get some water Get some water Right the way down. We got another round You know what's coming next let's hit it come on guys Go up with the weight The goal of this workout is to give me everything you got on 15 reps

[12:34] Whatever it takes to go up and if you can't make it, that's all right. Write it down drop it keep going All right, enough red enough talk. Let's get to work. You good Let's go. All right. I like that That's a big smooth. You good good Pretty boy is good. All right one two and beat up press. There you go. Press up Squeeze you got it. I know you got it. You know what I? Believe in you you got here. You know what it says a whole lot about you right there Come on. I'm with you. I want you to bring your knees out five There you go That was close to there you go up last one Bring the weights with you stand up with them. That's right turn around rose Right there watch it lean forward chest up hug your legs on the bench. Nothing's moving

[13:37] Are you ready? If you don't have a bench? Watch Nick Perfect form is right here, baby ready one go higher, but come on. I want to see higher I want to go higher One two fifteen all the way go nice Come on You want big back? This is it Total body is gonna get you there. They promise land here. We come right there. You want that body? You want that beasty look? You know what you're in the right place? You're doing good guys lift it up Come on we got four more we got three more and then you know what's coming You got one more up drop it reverse lunges no wrist no wrist for us We risk later we go home and we take a nap right the beats not taking a nap. No, no, no The pieces keep working out one two and reverse go

[14:40] all to focus right there Come on. I want to see your face. I want to feel you I Want you to talk to me and say I don't like you, but you know what you're gonna love me I'll tell them that with you. That's right. Watch that keep going chest up. Come on They focus in this moment right now Change is happening here How you doing Nick? Okay, so I want you to drop the weight and I want you to finish strong your form will not ever come in set 15 revs chest up Nick. Don't lose it. You own it. You got it. You got four There you go. You got three going back. There you go and stop guys drop the weight On the floor twist one two twist Twist 15 inside go

[15:40] There you go Now you resting now you're having fun, but you know what you work in the core again We making sure lower body upper body The connection the beast connection is in the house Come on. You almost there. Keep it tight nice and slow squeeze No rush 15 dress you guys four Three two done right water water water more water Right bro, that's it We got round number three shoulder print Single single double here you go single. You know what I'm gonna show you with a little bitty way single single Double right next You ready to go We're good to go

[16:43] No, what is that? The fish job was just showing you I want some real weight. You know what? Go the visa shoe For real you kidding me 15 reps you ready Why I'm ready. Let's do this. All right pretty boy Pick up and one two and single single Double there you go single single Double nice squeeze squeeze on top pull your shoulders up. There you go. You see that I'm controlling it is Even all the way 45 pounds It's like you know what but I wanted to push yourself all the way if it's like you drop the weight You write it down you keep going after you done with it. Say single single

[17:45] double ten pounds buddy talking about There you go. That's what I'm talking about come on For there you go single single double is one we got total 15 Now we speak in my language Good All right, this is it nice last one together finish One leg forward Now you grab the 10 or 15 or any whatever you feel comfortable You write it down you keep going to the side raise up Don't sacrifice the form here. We go. That's the move to the side Control it walk in the back of your shoulder 15 right 15 lift

[18:46] One two go side Both watch Nick watch Brian Put your hand on your knee chest up lean forward to the side lift it up Everything is controlled. That's why you work the core so you will not fall down You always know what you're working on back of the shoulder. You got three more guys There you go lift it up and we got last one We side other side How'd that feel great? Yes, 10 pounds. That's right one two go Side extend your arm if you're not doing the right form watch this Nick Right there You want to work the back of your shoulder if you need to drop the weights Nick show them drop the weight and lift it up That's all right as long as you squeeze as long as you got four more as long as you got two more

[19:49] Last one. Did you feel that? Man it burns still. That's right. Okay safe leg deadlift I'm gonna get 230 Nick what you got man? I got 20. Okay. That's good. That's good. You know what because we got 15 Here's the move lock your legs squeeze your glutes squeeze your quads Lean back I want you to scratch the weight going right there roll it on your legs glutes up chest up look at my back Nice and straight pull your shoulders back come up from the glutes right to the hamstring. Are you ready? One two beat up down Up i'm watching you. I got my eye on you go down stretch the hamstrings all the way Straight back shoulders back and keep your chest up Always always keep your form stay safe I'm having fun. I hope you too good out right there up

[20:53] stretch squeeze five Nick If you have to drop the weight you will drop the weight On my word Last one go up. There you go one more for me up drop next grab the weight lightweight Russian twist on the floor remember glutes right there spinal On the ground very tight slightly bend your knees and twist side to side 15 Right there buddy like that hug it love it. You know what lean back That will get you what you want. You want ripped abs. You want shredded abs? Yeah, Nick I want shredded abs. You want me to hold her there? You want to stay there? Let's go. Let's go 15 side side go now turn turn control your legs If you are not then you're using too much weight

[21:56] Drop the weights And you know what go lighter as long as you write it down. That's it. You see i'm proud of you from doing that There's no shame. It's all about doing the work. You do the work you write it down Stay safe keep the form if you have to drop it. That's right. He got it and done good Right on you know what's coming next same thing same round get some water We're going to a whole new level 15 reps single single double press If you didn't finish 15 Go lighter if it was too easy go heavier, but you know what I want I want you to give me a 10 not a 9 not a 7 unacceptable This is not school. This is beast program. Let's do it, baby. All right. You ready? Okay, so here we go

[22:59] Oh, yeah at 45 Now I say I go to 50 No, I say go to 60 I Ready It's all good, baby. Lift it up And one and two beats up single single double single Double just like that. What is it? Nothing is just weight I'm always in control Nothing else bother me. I'm focusing on the weights Oh and single single Double all day long just like that. That's right Nick press press As long as you don't let the ball move it control it right here from the core and it's squeezed You see that he's working the whole shoulder, but everything else is working. This is not easy. This is hard

[24:00] We're gonna get there. There you go Now up together grind There you go left together last one buddy last one together nice Yeah, good job leaning forward Lighter weight Get a 10 go up to 12 as long as you go up. That's what matters Didn't you have a 10 before yeah as long as you go up. That's what matters. You know what? I got it for you. Here we go A gift from the beat you ready? Let's do it one two end side Nothing is moving just my shoulder and my arms slightly bend your elbows focused on the back of your shoulder right there What's happened to your form drop the weights go to the tip Remember that here's the 10 right there. Come on There you go

[25:00] Nick good job three two Last one lift it up. Come on. If you have one more for me up nine other side Same thing start with the 15. See how he feels All right, make sure you write it down Chop chop chop chop One two and go chest up there you go. Let me show you something Drop it drop it. Let me show you something. Nick keep going. Okay, put your hands on your knee right there Lock your back body straight Focus and lift try start with a 10 right there. It's all right. Keep going. That's what it's all about It's keep going and up four up three And two doing good. That's what I'm talking about squeeze up and drop the weight Good job. Good job Steep legs deadlift Are you ready?

[26:02] Are you poops already? No way. Come on. This is total body all day long Straight legs lock them squeeze your glutes stretch one two fifteen Stretch come up. That's your move. You want to get that booty out and you want to stretch the hamstring 15 come on blank. I'll get you back There you go. As long as you go up. I'm good with that. Write it down. Keep going. Nice Stay with your form. Don't sacrifice that glutes out. Nick. I want to see you glutes out Nice. You have to drop it drop it. I'm good with this. Keep going. There you go. You see that? Come on three Down up. Come on squeeze your glutes last one. Nice Good job rushing twist. Come on twist twist Take the 10 You got eight got eight no break. All right. One two go twist twist twist twist

[27:06] I love it. You see that you're going to get all the ripples that you always wanted Right there. You see that that's from playing the piano for a long time side Side come on. What you're going to do? There you go. You're going to do it three two and drop Drop it. Get some water I love it. Right write it down guys write it down You okay good, okay All right A little bit of rest Write it down. You know where you started We're going to the next move. We got curls with coordination to hammer on the way down Here we go. Let me show you the first move. I'm going to grab a 20 right there 220

[28:07] That would be the start Curl it up Turn it bring it slow down right there again. Let me show you again curl it up Turn it slow. We got 16 like that. Are you ready? Let's go, bud Are you ready? Brian ready. No, I want it here. I am ready. Come on. Ready. That's right One two curl and twist there you go curl Turn you work in the short part of the biceps and you're working the long part of the biceps You know why i'm sweating? Because I am training upper body lower body total body. We got 15 Just like that What you got 16 pounds? Yes, sir. Thank you and nick 15 you see that Pay attention. We got five more

[29:08] One Up And turn. Go, nick. Up. Keep going Keep going Last two There you go. Last one up drop the weight One arm kick back Right there pick the weight elbow up. Here we go just like that And kick Kick we got 15 each side. You ready? Yep Let's do it one two and up kick two three four five Pay attention to my form Nothing is moving my elbow is up. I'm kicking up and I'm working my back with my triceps right there That's it all the way on top three two One nice other side turn get to your position Elbow up one two and kick

[30:11] There you go. Control it Nice nice. Let me watch fine. Here's Don't let your wrist rotate it right there, buddy. Keep it straight. No, you don't want to bend right there Nothing is moving inside your triceps right there. Keep going Up you got two. That's one. You got one Pick the weights up. We got standing cab rate right there At 30 At 30 watch the beat right there. Stay safe one two up down. That's it simple, right? One two and go 15. There you go two And three you work your calf That's the speed that I'm talking about up down total body From the bottom to the top from your tip toes all the way to your forehead four three two And nice drop. We're going to a side plank watch it. You want to look good in your baby suit? That's what you do

[31:19] Hold Hold it I look good Go down. You know what? Yeah, that's right Honey, did you see that? Uh-huh and as high as you can Go down as high as you can work it all the way up and down. Come on guys I know you want to look good in your bathing suit I want you to keep your body straight right there. So bring it forward right there one line. You see that one line good almost this Five Nika, are you doing over there? Man? I'm doing good bro. What is that funny noises you're making? Oh, like it's hard. That's not hard last one drop nice Come on Whoo We're good. You already did the other side. Did you? No sir. No sir. I'm just checking. I want to make sure that he's with me

[32:21] I'm here. Isn't that your favorite pose? Huh? Yes, sir. Can you see that? Whoo Ready and out 15. There you go. Straight back. That's why I'm standing here I want to make sure that pretty boy's got his form perfect straight body. Let's see nick Come on nick right there. What you got there walking right here? You're gonna make those faces in a pool There you go try not to yeah and the noises keep it on there you go two One and stop rest water one more round I write it down. That's right Write it down. That's how you train you write it down get to your water Take your supplements say your praise you said thank you beat for giving me that body Total body. Are you ready? Let's go. All right Back to the curls

[33:23] Where is it? All right, here you go 30 Ready curl turn slow down and two Turn slow down. You see that that's how you get big tenons not just guns We don't need the license here because we got the weapons the secret weapons Right there with this exercise. Come on one two go Turn good up Up He's always keeping his form Perfect. You want to make sure whatever you take You write it down You take your water you rest you keep your form And then you know what you have fun with it all the way How you doing blind? Great. Oh great. I'm doing great. I'm doing great. I don't even feel it. What is this four pounds?

[34:26] You got three more 15. All right Don't let your knees go in keep them out. Keep your chest up last one lift it up turn kick back Come on kick back Right there lean forward elbow up kick. That's the move one two and start guys go Kick the triceps all the way up make if you're elbow up I want you to not touch my hand Don't risk it if you have to drop the weight you drop it you do whatever you take there you go three two Right there last one change side. Right there Brian. Well with me. Ready? So i'm doing it with you, buddy You got me lean forward chest up one two and kick nice two three four

[35:26] five total body triceps Working the triceps. We want to get big guns, right? Nice kick four three two last one Drop Good job Pick the weights. We're going right to the cab You know the move Let's go one two and up down Watch the weight. They are not moving total control. I'm in the zone. This is focusing guys Pick it up go as high as you can You want to get big calves Big abs Big arms big chest big shoulders big back Total body two One Drop the weight. Good job. Good job Back to the beach pose Side plank Make sure you move the weights

[36:30] Is that your favorite side? My favorite side. Best side. The best side. The beast doesn't have a best side. It's all best all around One two and come up and down. Keep your body straight straight up make That's right soldiers all the way up go down What goes up? Let's go down, right? You work your abs. You give me all you got Squeeze up down. Keep your glutes tight You want to work your abs all the way bottom to the top Squeezing four three Two One more guys. Nice. Turn to the other side. Clip. No way. Come on One two Up down Up down so easy Up down. Oh, yeah. It's so hot in here. Where's my lotion? I'm burning up

[37:35] No Get up. Come on up down. This is no funky business here. This is the beast total body Up. Keep your back straight and three go. Come on two Up one more guys all the way drop Hallelujah Get some water write everything down. Make sure you have it down Catch your breath. You guys doing amazing. I am so pleased Stretching my favorite part Nicely done. I can't believe I just said that it is my favorite part Raise your arms and stretch your shoulder extend your arm And breathe let it go. We are focusing right here from the back of the shoulder going to the lat You with me guys. We're with you, bro. All the way. That's right. That's my team. That's my army Other side one place one time one unit scared

[38:36] Cross your fingers extend your arms drop your chest lean forward breathe That sweat and tears Work in the total body I'm feeling it. But you know what I am loving it extend that leg lean forward reach out Open your chest And other side Same thing toes up heel to the ground reach out chest up Breathe from your nose And don't force it. Enjoy it right there. You want to feel the stretch in the hamstring right from here Bend down 90 degrees. We stretch in the abductors Initize the hip flexors all around hold it lean back And let go Just let go Enjoy the moment. You're just finishing a total body workout. You know what you work hard

[39:39] You earned it now you own it and you know what that's what it's all about lean back Chest up breathe Stand up that was bad ass guys total body beast out. I am proud of you Good job. That was a killer Well, I'm going home to do that
