TITLE: Recovery Position for Children and Infants |  Child and Baby First Aid  | EMT First Aid Training |
VIDEO ID: bpA6uWkeuPA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bpA6uWkeuPA
UPLOAD DATE: 2022-06-16
DURATION: 10:19
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] In this video, we're going to be looking at the unconscious casualty. But, unlike other videos, I want you to join in. So, I want you to grab a helper you've got at home or a teddy or a cushion that you can use that's going to be our unconscious casualty. Cuz we're going to imagine that we've got somebody unconscious on the floor. And we're going to put the primary survey together with a secondary survey together with the recovery position. So, let's just recap that first. The primary survey is when we check the area for danger. We look, listen, and we smell for things that could be dangerous for us. We're then checking for a response. If there's no response, we shout for help. We then open the person's airway. And then we look, listen, and feel for breathing for 10 seconds. So, that's our primary survey. Then the secondary survey is when we do the head-to-toe check. And then the recovery position is the position we put them in in order to maintain an airway so they're not going to choke on their own vomit, saliva, and

[01:01] it allows the airway to stay open. So, that's the practical bits we are going to put into our practice situation. Okay. So, the very first thing we're going to do then is there's a casualty on the floor. We've walked into the room. We're checking the area for danger. We're looking. We're listening. We're smelling for things that are dangerous, such as fire, other people being there, things that have fallen down, things that are touching them. We make it safe if needed. We talk to the casualty to see if they're awake. If they don't respond to my voice, I'm going to push on their shoulders gently to see if I can get a response or maybe make a loud noise. They're not responding to me. Now, I'm going to shout for a helper because I want a helper to get me a first aid kit, especially if I'm in a workplace. Now, if I was in a workplace, this is when I would put my gloves and PPE on. This example I'm showing you, I'm in a home situation, but in a workplace,

[02:01] please put your appropriate PPE on. I'm then going to open the airway by doing a chin lift and a head tilt. So, one hand on the forehead, two fingers on the chin, and pushing the forehead back and lifting the chin up. I'm getting nice and low to this casualty. And I'm looking, and I'm listening, and I'm feeling for normal breathing. So, I'm feeling with my cheek, I'm listening with my ear, and I'm looking at their belly or their torso rising and falling, and I'm checking for 10 seconds. Now, if someone was breathing normally, an adult would breathe between two and four times if they were breathing normally in 10 seconds. If you're doing this on a baby, a baby be breathing 10 times in 10 seconds. Now, it's really important to check for normal breathing. Because if someone has something called agonal gasps, which someone goes this can be the last breath that someone breathes.

[03:02] And actually, they might need CPR performed to them. So, please check for normal breathing for 10 seconds. Great news, the person is breathing normally. So, then what we're going to do is do our secondary survey. We go from the head all the way down to the toes, and we're looking for anything such as bleeding or broken bones that we think could explain why this person is injured. So, we're checking the head for any lumps and bumps, looking for fluid coming out of their ears. If they've got fluid coming out of their ears, it could indicate spinal issues. Looking to see if they've got their medical ID necklaces on. We then look down one arm at a time. I'd roll up the sleeves, have a look for lacerations, and also bracelets. I'll do the same on the other arm. I will then check the torso to make sure the sternum's okay. Make sure that the belly there's no hard bits on the belly. If there was, it could indicate internal bleeding. I gently push on the pelvis to make sure

[04:02] it's still intact. Then I use the back of my hands to see if there's anything in the pockets. The reason I use the back of my hands is because if they did have something sharp in the pocket, I'm more likely to grab it if I went palm down, and therefore I might hurt myself. And then I check one leg out at a time. So, it's a primary survey, then the secondary survey. Then, now I've found no injuries with this casualty, I'm going to place them into the recovery position. Now, I do this by putting both my arms on the other side of the patient, so I lean over. The hand closest to the casualty's head, I'm going to link fingers with them, and I'm going to gently bring it across their body and slap the cheek closest to me, but I'm still holding my hand in place. I won't let go, cuz if I did let go, the hand would just flop back down again. So, I hold it in place. With my other arm, I lift the outside of their leg, lift the knee up, and push the shin and their foot towards their bottom.

[05:03] And then, all I simply need to do is use one finger or very gently push their knee towards me, and they will roll over on their side. I need to make sure the knee is at 90° in order to make sure they stay on their side, and then I open the airway. And the reason they're on their side is because it's allowing their airway to remain clear. If they're sick or they've got any vomit or blood in their mouth, it's just going to drain away. I'm going to keep checking and monitoring their breathing while they're in this position. And if it hasn't been called already, I would now call the ambulance. Now, we put them in the recovery position because you're going to it allows them to maintain an open airway. And that's really important to have an open airway. However, if we find they've got a broken leg or a broken arm, or we forget how to do the recovery position, then what we're going to do?

[06:03] Well, we kind of do the same thing. We maintain an open airway. So, that means they stay on their back and we just keep their airway open. The downside of this, however, is that my hands are now attached to that casualty. So, that's great if I can be with that casualty all the time and there's lots of other helpers around and the other helpers can go and open the front door for me and bring the ambulance crew to me. But if I'm by myself with this casualty in the home, at some point I need to open the front door for the ambulance crew. So, ideally I need them in the recovery position because if I let go of the casualty's airway, it will close again. And that's when the airway could be blocked and they might stop breathing. So, what you do is go and pause me and I want you to practice that either with a cushion on the floor or with somebody else. The primary survey, the secondary survey, and the recovery position. Or go and practice putting yourself in that position. And try doing it on both sides. Don't just do it on one side. Go on, pause me and go and practice. I'll be here when you come back. So,

[07:04] we've just covered recovery position for a child, someone from 1 to 18 as well as an adult 18 upwards. But when it comes to a baby, we need to adapt things. A baby is classified from 0 to 1. So, we still do our primary survey, we still do our secondary survey, we still do the recovery position, but we just adapt it. So, we're going to probably find a baby in their bed, in their cot, maybe on the floor or in a car seat. So, we're going to approach the area for danger exactly the same. Make sure we look all around, we listen and we smell for dangers, exactly the same as before. This time when we're asking the baby for a response, obviously baby's not going to be able to talk to us, but I'm probably going to be tickling baby's feet, tickling baby's hands, just trying to get them to wake up like you would normally try and wake a baby up. If there's no response, again, I'll be shouting for someone to get me some help. Whether that's someone in your house, your neighbors, anybody, just scream for help. You're then going to open a baby's airway. Now, this is also what we're going to adapt, because if you put a baby's head

[08:05] all the way back like this, it actually closes the airway. And the same if we have the baby's head all the way forward, it will close the airway. So, with baby's airway, we need to have a completely neutral airway. So, that means just tipping back slightly. That action here, that we would be thinking would be opening the airway, actually closes it. And this action here also closes a baby's airway. So, baby's airway, if it's on a flat surface, needs to be completely neutral. Then we look, listen, and feel for normal breathing. Get nice and low, listening with our ear, feeling with our cheek, looking at their belly, their torso going up and down. Same as before. Now, when we're looking for normal breathing, we're looking for a baby to be breathing about eight to 10 times in those 10 seconds, which is different from an adult. If they are breathing, great news, but we're just going to just check to see if there's any damage anywhere on the body. And just do a quick head-to-toe check, so around the head, just their arms, their bellies,

[09:05] their legs, just to see if there's any injuries anywhere. And then the recovery position for a baby is adapted, because we don't want We don't want to leave a baby on the floor, and it's going to be very hard to manipulate a baby's arms and legs like we've just been doing on each other or on a child. So, a baby's recovery position is like this. We're keeping the hand on the head to make sure the baby's airway is neutral. We're keeping the head slightly lower than bottom, so if the baby is sick, they're not going to choke on any vomit. And we're just cradling the baby. Now, we can do it towards us if you wish, or we can turn baby around and have baby away from us. Just keeping that airway neutral though. So, we don't want the head closed, we don't want the head tipped back. Neutral airway, head slightly lower than bottom, so if they are sick, then it's just going to drain away from their airway. So, that's a baby's recovery position, and that's how we adapt the primary survey, the secondary survey, and the recovery position for a baby who is zero to one years old. And you can go and practice that with a teddy or with a

[10:07] cushion as well. Don't forget to hit that And please comment below.
