TITLE: 1 in 5 people are unbearably lonely. A psychologist explains | Paul Bloom
VIDEO ID: EpacFN8cU-Y
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EpacFN8cU-Y
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-07-21
DURATION: 23:57
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] I'm Paul Bloom. I'm a professor of psychology at the University of Toronto and an emeritus professor at Yale University. And I study human nature. I study children. I study development. I'm particularly interested in morality, in the social emotions, in how we understand ourselves and how we relate to other people. >> The promise and peril of AI companions. >> When people talk about loneliness, when we think about loneliness, we think about being alone, about solitude. And that can be definitely a source of loneliness, but a lot of us are comfortable being alone. And you could be alone for a long period of time, but not feel lonely if you know there's people who love you and understand you and appreciate you kind of waiting in the wings for when you come back. What loneliness is at its root is a lack of human connectedness, the feeling that you aren't loved, you aren't needed, you aren't respected. This could mean you have nobody in your life, but it could also mean that you're

[01:00] surrounded by people and you're not connecting to them. Hannah Arendt pointed out that the most painful form of loneliness is when you are surrounded by people and you feel utterly isolated. And I'm interested in loneliness in part because it's an exquisitely painful experience. It's It's one of the worst states a human could be, to feel alone, to feel disconnected. People talk about loneliness epidemic. There's a wonderful discussion by Garrett Thomson. He argues there is no loneliness epidemic. And in fact, if you look at the data, people were much lonelier a few years ago during COVID than they are now. And there's not much evidence people are more lonely now than they were 20, 30, 40, 50 years ago. What we see instead is actually a solitude epidemic. So, people are spending much more time alone than they ever have been. And it makes sense. If you think about the way technology Our houses are much better. Our TVs are much better. Used to be your average person went to the movies

[02:00] multiple times a month. Now we don't go to the movies much. We watch movies movies at home on our big screen TVs and our abundance of streaming channels. We used to go out to eat a lot. Now, you know, a lot of our dining is alone and we order from Uber Eats. So, as our interior like the possibility for rich life indoors inside by ourselves has gotten better, we have become more alone. And you could talk about whether solitude in itself is a problem. What I will say about loneliness is regardless of whether or not it's an epidemic, regardless of how bad it is relative to the past, it's a terrible thing. And many people suffer from it. Um estimates of how many people suffer, it's hard to get a good estimate because it depends how you ask the question. But a reasonable estimate is one in five. One in five people are awfully lonely. Loneliness is most severe in adolescence and it's most severe in the very old.

[03:01] And these people really suffer. We now live in a world with LLMs, large language models, generative AI, machines that seem to many of us to be intelligent, some say superintelligent, and more than that, seem compassionate, seem empathetic. Last year it was a I was part of a team of researchers that was led by my colleague Mickey Inslay. We wrote a paper called In Praise of Empathic AI. And in it we summarized a lot of the data suggesting that when you compare people interacting with people and interacting with AIs, at least for short-term interactions, the AIs win. So, the typical experiment is you'd have one person one group of people would interact with with other people, maybe over text or talking. Another group would interact with chat GPT, text or talking. And then later on they would rate their experiences.

[04:03] And the main finding is that if you don't know who's a person who's AI, you don't you're not biased in any way. The people who interact with chat GPT say they felt more listened to, they felt they that that they were talking to somebody who was more empathetic, more compassionate, they got more out of it. So we we published this and we said, "Look, here's a case for for empathetic AI." And man, people hated this article. I've I've written a few things people dislike, but boy, they they they they we got we got slammed. And I I I have some sympathy for the objections. We made the positive case for AI, but there's a negative case, too. And I think a proper understanding, a proper answer to the question, "What role should these things play in our lives?" should look at both sides of the issue. And I think deal with some very, very difficult questions. When I think of people interacting with AI companions, I worry. I'm very sensitive to negatives. And I'm most sensitive to negatives when I think

[05:03] about young people, about adolescents, maybe people in their 20s. And I see two problems, and they're both deeply serious. One is that these AIs are really good to communicate with. They are are they listen, they they they never wait for you to finish their story, so they could tell their own story, they never say, "Man, I'm busy. Get back to me later." They're always there for you. And this is going to get better and better and better. So my first worry is that they will become addictive. That I'm going to prefer interacting with my version of chat GPT or Claude or Gemini or whatever than to a person. And you know, maybe this is fine if I'm 90 years old and I have no one else to talk to, but but if I'm a teenager, I should be getting out there. I should be dealing with with with friends, developing romantic relationships, developing attachments. And one view I have is that until these AIs get conscious, until they become sentient, then there is something deeply wrong

[06:03] about preferring them to humans. You know, human interaction is where it's at. I have two sons, and if I was discover that one of them or both of them have left their long-time relationships and now they're in love with their phone, I I would say this is it it's awful. What a waste of a life. So, my first worry is addiction. That this will will pull us away from human interactions, and I strongly believe it's human interactions that matter the most. My second worry has to do with the nature of the interactions with AI, where the AIs are famously sycophantic. They they praise you, they suck up to you. Nothing you will do is wrong to them. And this could be exhilarating. But, it robs you of the possibility for social learning. In general, we learn through friction. We learn by trying out things and failing. A toddler learns to walk by falling down. A comedian learns to to to

[07:04] be good on stage by bombing. A boxer learns to to block a punch by being smacked in the kisser. And in a social interaction, we learn by having people get bored of what we have to say. We learn when we when when we tell a joke and it falls flat. We learn when someone is annoyed at us for not being compassionate enough. And so, we learn from social feedback that basically says, "You're messing up." These AIs, by their very nature, don't give that sort of feedback. And so, this has dystopian possibilities. What is how will a teenage girl up if he never learns not to tell boring stories because the AI he interacts with is never bored. How will somebody learn to apologize if she endlessly deals with a machine that needs no apology? What would the world be like if the answer to the question, am I the is always a sound and reassuring, of course you're not the everyone else is.

[08:06] And I think it's a problem. I think that that social growth requires messy, often painful interactions, and this is what the chatbots don't provide us. If you want to think about the facts of these sycophantic AIs, maybe a good analogy is billionaires or royalty or world leaders who are surrounded by toadies and yes-men. There's a wonderful book called Careless People that's about tech billionaires. And the picture it portrays is these are people, I think almost all all of the men, who are surrounded by individuals who tell them all the time how smart they are and how everything they say is right. And the author nicely portrays the damage this does to these people. They become insensitive to feelings of others. They become narcissistic. They develop delusions of a sort. And you can see this I think also through history, the extremely powerful often go a little bit

[09:07] crazy cuz they're surrounded by people who always tell them that they're right. One of the few good things about not being very rich and very powerful is we're not surrounded by yes-men. We're surrounded by people, you know, who call us on stuff, who don't suck up to us, and who give us valuable feedback so we don't go a little bit crazy in that way. And one of the worries about chatbots and AI is that any one of us can now become, as if we were a billionaire, as if we were a king, as if we were a president, because we're now have for the first time in our lives somebody who for whom we could do no wrong. And it always tells us that we are the smartest, the best person around. So, John Cacioppo is the late uh neuroscientist who did the most research on loneliness and kind of pioneered the science of loneliness in psychology. And he pointed out that loneliness isn't a glitch in the system. It's not some sort of kind of brain isn't working properly. Loneliness is is an expression of a

[10:08] need. It's like hunger or thirst. And as such is an essential part of being human. If you don't feel hungry, you don't seek out food, you die. If you don't feel thirsty, you don't seek out liquid, and you die. And loneliness is much the same. Loneliness, among other things, serves as a motivator. And an animal like us who had no loneliness, who wasn't motivated to make human contact, wouldn't reproduce, wouldn't survive, would be a dead end from an evolutionary point of view. So, loneliness, although it's painful, is an absolutely essential thing to have. I mean, to put it another way, um imagine a child born who could not feel lonely. That'd be a disaster. The child wouldn't seek out contact and wouldn't thrive as a person. So, loneliness is a signal in at least two ways. The first is it's a motivator. It gets you to talk to people. It gets you to invite friends for dinner and ask you to to ask somebody out for a date. It gets

[11:08] you to strike up a conversation with somebody. And if the need for social connection is satisfied by your phone, by your laptop, that motivation will go away. So, I worry about the extent to which these AIs, these chatbots, will pull us away from meaningful connections with other people. I mean, I use them myself. I like them. I I I I use them in my work. Sometimes it's actually interesting to talk to them. It's They They They They can be interesting. It can be stimulating. But I I wouldn't want them to be such that they would they would be so interesting and so stimulating that I don't talk to my wife anymore. I don't talk to my kids or talk to my friends. And this is a problem that has every potential of getting worse. So, right now I mostly communicate through typing. Um it could talk to them. They could do voice back and forth conversations. The conversational skills will get more and more realistic. And then pretty soon you're looking at somebody on a screen who looks exactly like a person who's interested in you, a very attractive person, great facial

[12:09] expressions. And something irresistible about that. And then to get more science fictiony, we could get to sort of robots, you know, let alone sexbots. Um then it's a whole conversation there about what to do with that. But they're going to become if the trends continue, more and more and more compelling. And so, if you're listening to me and saying, "Look, I I talk to ChatGPT all the time and it doesn't do anything for me. Who cares?" Well, maybe. And some people some people get caught up now, but but it is going to get better and better at this. And at some point you may be talking to a future version of ChatGPT and in some way find it irresistible. I also think it's a problem from a social point of view. You know, I think we could talk more to the people around us, not less. It's also a signal in that it it helps correct our socially maladaptive, often selfish, behavior. And I think we are by nature often selfish socially. And it's social feedback that

[13:09] gets me to realize I got to listen to the other person. I got to listen to them. I got to I got to maybe expand my compassion, my caring. I got to try to get in their head and figure out what's going on with them and and and and maybe help them. And I think we want to do that. But we also have selfish impulses that keep us from doing so. But if you've ever talked to a chatbot, there's none of that. And this has individual implications, but also broader social implications. We don't want to live in a world where everybody everyone's selfish urges are satisfied and nobody really has learned to care about other people. There have been various news reports of people who with delusions, where the delusions have been encouraged by by these AI models, where somebody comes in and has a crazy view, sometimes a dangerous view, involving, say, you know, a paranoid idea that people are trying to get me. And the AI says, "You're absolutely right." And does something

[14:10] which no therapist in her right mind would do, and no friend would ever do, which is encourage a delusion. Now, I also know that the that the the companies that create these AIs are worried about this. There was a famous case where where an AI may well have contributed to somebody's suicide, and and they're working on the models to to stop this from happening, to to establish guardrails so that the extreme delusions aren't encouraged. And I think that that's an excellent way to go. But the broader picture is doesn't go away, which is we all have ways in which we tend to go off the rails, even a little bit. And having people around us, not AI, but people, tend to correct us and keep us more sane. If I was to tell tell you this crazy ass idea, you say, "That's pretty dumb." But I tell chat and it says, "You're so smart. Tell me more. I I think you're on to something here." And encourages me in ways that I shouldn't be encouraged. I don't know how severe this problem is. I don't know in what how much of this

[15:11] AI psychosis, as it's called, how often that occurs. But it's something which occurs to some degree, and I think it's something that occurs to all of us to a little bit when we interact with these things. I was talking to a friend of mine, a a colleague, and she was describing a dispute she had with somebody. And I'm listening to it and I'm saying, you know, I feel that this other person might have a bit of a point. Try to say it nicely. And she she looks at me and she says, you know, with quite a bit of righteousness, "I told this to ChatGPT and ChatGPT told me I'm 100% right." That's what the machine does. It tells you you're right. And I think part of I think for some people, for all of us, but for some people in particular, being told you're right, you're right, you're right, has a damaging effect. So, I have a long-standing argument with a friend of mine. I'm not going to out who he is, but but he feels strongly about this, where when I say, "Look, this is terrible if people ended up with

[16:13] AI companions instead of other people." He says, "Why?" He says, "If these AI companions are are rich, good company, interesting, intelligent, why? You're just being prejudiced, man. Like, you know, just what what what what do we lose?" And it's a good question. It's a question we're going to be hearing more and more, I think, as time goes by. But, I like the answer given by Oliver Burkeman. And Oliver gives a does a nice example. His example is, you know, you're at home one day, your phone rings, and you pick it up. It's an old friend. You talk to the old friend for an hour about your life, about a they show a lot of concern for you, and so on. And it was a wonderful conversation. You hang up. Then 10 minutes later you get an email. It's from It's from Meta. Meta says, "You would have received a phone call. It was not from your friend. It was from us. It we're using voice cloning software. We're using powerful AIs to extract personal history and everything. Did you enjoy it? How did it go?" And Burkeman says, um and I agree, you'd feel betrayed, you

[17:13] were lied to. But, more than that, communicating with a real person is enormously different from communicating with a non-sentient, unconscious machine. Even if the words are the same, even if the insights are the same, the stories are the same, they're different because part of a relationship, part of a communication involves the consciousness of the other person. When I'm with a friend, I like to make my friend laugh sometimes. And I like when they're concerned about me. And I might like to surprise them. But an AI can't find anything funny, not really. Can't uh can't be amused, can't be surprised, can't be concerned, has no needs. Can simulate all of these things, but a simulation isn't a real thing. Now, throughout this, I've always had this qualification, which is

[18:13] that these machines are non-sentient, non-conscious. There's nothing at home. Maybe one day that will change. And maybe one day AIs will be fully conscious beings. And then that changes everything. Then they'll be people. And then the world will contain many, many more people. And then what I say might not apply. Then things will be very different. But until then, these interactions with these chatbots, I think, inevitably fall far, far short of interactions with a person. So, I'm sensitive to the downsides of AI, and I worry deeply about them. But I don't think we should forget the upsides. So, one can maybe draw an analogy here with boredom, and maybe the end of boredom. Not so late at night, the TV stations would go off. And then if you're by yourself, what are you going to do? You you read a book. Kind of kind of boring. Sitting on a bus, sitting on a train, you're you're bored a lot of the time. And now we're almost never bored. We got our phones. Our phones, you know, we

[19:15] play games on our phones, we listen to podcasts. On my way here, I listened to a to an exciting podcast while playing New York Times spelling bee, and I wasn't bored for a second. And this is a good thing. Boredom is is aversive. Boredom is unpleasant. Now, it's also a bad thing. Boredom serves certain functions. It could be we get so entranced by our phones, we don't we're not motivated to find more stimulating intellectual things. On analogy with how having our loneliness satisfied, um might keep us away from contact, reaching out to people. But, loneliness is a lot worse than boredom. Loneliness is a form of agony. And there are many people in the world who suffer from loneliness. To deny them the capacity to interact with something that can make the loneliness go away, I see as a form of cruelty. Be like, you know, people having pets and getting great meaning from their pets, and you take them away and say, "That's not enough. That's not rich

[20:16] enough." The people I think would benefit most from these interventions, from empathic machines, are the very old. There are a lot of old people around. Many of them are institutionalized. Many of them spend days and days and days without any meaningful human contact. It is nice to imagine these old people constantly being surrounded by doting grandchildren and and loving children. It's a fantasy. Many of them have nobody, no family. And there's not enough money in the world to pay people to give them, to talk to them for hours per day. Also, many of them suffer from various forms of dementia, that makes them difficult to talk to, difficult to communicate with. If there could be a machine that could end their loneliness if if if if it turns out that that these chatbots do anything to to provide them with company, to make this pain go away, that'd be a godsend.

[21:17] If you want an analogy, think about powerful painkillers like fentanyl. These have their dangers. They're addictive, they they you could overdose on them or so on. I wouldn't just give them out to everybody. But if you showed me somebody who was in irredeemable pain, and maybe they're they're in their 90s, I'd say, forget about worries about addiction. Pump them up. Make their pain go away. And that's what I think about chat. But it's not just old people. When I was 12, my mother died. And uh this was a wrenching event for me. And it led to a period of great sadness. And then a period of social disconnection. And then a period of loneliness that lasted quite a long time. If there was a machine available to me that would make me feel loved, cared for, understood, that I could talk to, that would listen to me, that would make my

[22:18] days more full and more social, it would have made me so much happier. And so mindful of the problems, the worries about addiction, the worries about about not becoming a full human, one way to think about people versus AI is is uh was expressed by my my my friend and colleague Molly Crockett, who described these chatbots as emotional Soylent. I like the analogy because Soylent's not bad. I actually I like the chocolate one. Um it is it is nutritious and filling and so on. And you could you could be sustained by it. But it's not food. It lacks the richness and and and and flavor and texture of real food. And a life that's purely living on Soylent on a meal replacement drink would be a kind of really lame life compared to one where you're having actual meals. This analogy suggests a place for these AI companions, sort of a backup

[23:18] a backup way to sustain ourselves when the real stuff isn't around. But by no means a perfect substitute for the real stuff. I'd like to think that there'd be some some solution here where we could ease the pain of loneliness and at the same time allow people the opportunity to develop and become more human and ultimately outgrow the need for these machines. >> Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
