TITLE: This social signal kills charisma faster than anything else | Vanessa Van Edwards
VIDEO ID: O7AJKBeWg-Q
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7AJKBeWg-Q
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-06-09
DURATION: 17:53
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] I'm Vanessa Van Edwards. I'm a behavioral researcher and best-selling author. My books Captivate and Cues teach people the 97 signals to be charismatic. I also teach communication at Harvard University and have online courses for smart people who want to learn social skills. >> How to make a great first impression. >> A first impression is so important for every interaction. It's the foundation for a good interaction. If you can nail your first impression in those first few seconds, everything in the interaction becomes easier. On the other hand, if you make an awkward or a bad or a disengaged first impression, everything about your connection becomes harder. Those first few seconds, you're trying to establish two things: presence and trust. The clearer you can signal your presence as memorable and effective, the easier your interaction will be. A big myth about first impressions is that your first impression happens the moment you start talking. I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but your first

[01:01] impression happens the moment someone first sees you. That means you only have a few seconds, sometimes less than a second, to form that foundation of trust that you need for an entire interaction. The big question is, what is presence? There's foundational research from Dr. Susan Fiske that looks at how we connect with others. There are two essential elements for presence. First, warmth. This is your trust, your likeability, your openness. But second, just as important is your competence. That's your effectiveness, your capability, your productivity. When we first meet someone, we're trying to very quickly decide, how warm are you and how competent are you? Specifically, as humans, we're trying to answer two basic questions. Can I trust you? Warmth. And can I rely on you? Competence. People with an incredible presence, a memorable presence, are very quickly trying to answer those two questions. And for you, the faster you can answer those two questions, you can trust me, you can

[02:01] rely on me, the more memorable and effective your presence is. When I first read this research and saw this amazing, basically a formula for presence on warmth and competence, there was one part of the research that made me take pause, and we have to mention it here. This is not your actual warmth and competence. It's your perceived warmth and competence. Meaning, you can be the smartest, most trustworthy person in the room, but if you're not clearly signaling that warmth and competence, people will not believe it. I think this is the most important aspect of presence. If you are showing up to your interactions authentically trustworthy, which I hope you are, and knowing your stuff, we have to clearly signal that with warmth and competence for people to believe in our presence. The goal is not to fake confidence, it's to align your inner intention with your outer expression. The question is, how do we read someone's warmth and competence? It all comes down to our cues. Cues are these subtle but powerful social signals humans send to each other. There are

[03:01] actually four channels of cues. First, our words. This is the channel we use the most. Yes, our words communicate our ideas, but actually the words we use also signal our warmth and competence. The second channel is our nonverbal. So, our body language, our facial expressions, our gestures, these also signal trust, warmth, and competence, reliability, or knowledge. The third channel is voice or vocal tonality. This is our volume, our pace, our cadence. How we say our words matters just as much as what we say. And the last, the smallest channel is our ornaments. So, the colors we wear, the jewelry, what's behind us in our background, what's on our desk, the props we're holding in our profile photos, that also can signal warmth and competence. I like to split cues up into two buckets, positive and negative. Positive cues stimulate connection and engagement. They are crucial to a great first impression. The second bucket, negative cues. These signal disinterest, discomfort, anxiety. They begin to create difficult or

[04:02] friction-filled interactions. Now, what most people don't realize about cues is there's a cycle. In this way, we often decode cues in social settings. So, we'll walk into a a meeting or we walk into a room and we decode the room. We read the room. We want to see what cues are being sent to us. Do people like us? Are they positive cues or do people not like us? Are they negative cues? And this is the second part of the cycle now. After we decode a cue, we internalize it. If someone just has sent us a cue of social rejection, our body goes, "Uh-oh, I'm not safe." And it begins to do the last part of the cycle, which is encoding. That's sending social signals back. To explain how cues work, I like to think of a study that changed the way that I think about social signals. In this study, they brought people into their lab and they had them walk into a room of actors. The actors were instructed to send the participant a cue of social rejection. A cue of social rejection is very negative. It could be an eye roll. It could be a scoff.

[05:02] It's something that's designed to make us feel like we don't belong. What they found was when the participant saw the cue of social rejection, their own field of vision increased. Their pupils dilated so they could see more of the environment. Why? This is the cue cycle in action. They decoded a negative cue. They internalized it. "Uh-oh, I'm not safe." And then they began to encode back nervousness and anxiety. What's critical to a first impression is showing up, encoding the right cues, sending social signals of warmth and competence, which hopefully others will internalize as I can rely and trust this person and they send warmth and competence signals back to us. This is the basis of all great social connections, especially at work. We are very attuned to people who are sending us positive cues, warmth and competence, so we can feel, ah, I'm in good hands. I can rely on this person. We also want to make sure that we are spotting the correct negative cues, so we can disengage them or disarm them. Can we

[06:04] also debunk a myth here, which is the Albert Mehrabian study that 93% of our communication is nonverbal. That study was overgeneralized and unable to be repeated, which means that yes, a lot of our communication is nonverbal, but it's very hard to pinpoint exactly how much. Even Mehrabian himself cautioned against using this study too much and in every context. We do know that we often as humans look to nonverbal signals to see authenticity. So, for example, if I were to say to you, "Hey, I'm so happy to see you." You are more likely to believe my nonverbal over my words. In this way, we know that nonverbal makes up a critical amount of our communication and it should not be ignored. The goal in every interaction is to make our cues purposeful, so that we are sending signals that put people at ease, that make them feel that they're in the right hands and they can actually open up to connect with you. Also, if we're purposeful and intentional with our cues, it puts us in the driver's seat. It makes us feel intentional and in control, which is the back door into

[07:06] confidence. The next question that we have to answer is what do we do if someone sends us a negative cue? How do we stop it from hijacking our emotions? How do we make sure that we're internalizing it and not letting us throw us off our game? Luckily, there is amazing research from Dr. Matthew Lieberman at UCLA. He devised a very interesting experiment. He brought people into his lab and he put them in fMRIs, scanned their brain. And he showed them pictures of fearful and angry faces. What he found is that when people were in the scanner and they saw the picture of a fearful or angry face, they in fact caught the emotion. That part of their amygdala that is very fear-based also lit up. In this way, emotions are contagious. If we see someone show us an angry face or a scared face, we catch that anger or fear. But, here's the best part. When he taught them to say or label anger, fear, it disengaged the amygdala. It made it so that those participants no longer felt angry and afraid. In this way, learning how to label cues is super

[08:09] empowering. It's the only way that we can stop that hijacking process. The first cue I want to teach you is called a punctuator. So, a punctuator is a habitual cue that someone uses. For example, you might have someone who punctuates with a surprise micro-expression. That's when someone widens their eyes and opens their mouth. For them, they might be when they're curious, when they're happy. That would not mean they are constantly surprised. Everyone in your life probably has a punctuator they use out of habit. You probably have one as well. Before I teach you what all the cues mean, it's important to understand first what your punctuator is. A really easy way to do this is to watch a video of yourself, maybe a previous meeting recording, and watch yourself on silent. What nonverbal cue are you doing with your face or your hands or your body that you do out of habit? Same thing with the people you work with or the people in your life. What are they punctuating with? For them, that is their nonverbal habit. First, let's talk about my favorite warmth cues in a first impression. What

[09:10] happens when you first see someone? You typically reach out for a handshake, a cheek kiss, a fist bump, a high five, a hug, a side hug, but not those. This is your human-to-human instinct to reach out and touch. Now, touch has a lot of different meanings around the world, but what we do know is when one human touches another, we produce a little chemical called oxytocin. Oxytocin does a lot of things in our body, but for our social purposes, it's the chemical of connection. The moment you skin-to-skin touch with someone, you produce this chemical that is the feeling of connection. It makes you feel rapport, it makes you feel trust. The reason when we first meet someone we want to touch is we're trying to generate the exact chemical we need for warmth. So, you have a few options when you first meet someone and I highly recommend picking the one that you are most comfortable with that works in your culture. If you can reach out for a handshake, we typically like one to three pumps with a new person. You also might reach out for a cheek kiss or a high five. Those are also great as long as they're reciprocated and know that the amount of

[10:11] touch increases the amount of oxytocin. A hug produces more oxytocin than a handshake, a handshake produces more oxytocin than a high five. You pick. We talked about the body language, we also have to talk about the tonality. Here is the biggest mistake people make in a first impression. They hold their breath and their hello sounds like this. Hello. All the way up here, little bit of vocal fry. When we hold our breath, especially on that first word, it makes us sound anxious, low competence. I want you to practice what I call a happy hello. This is saying hello on the out breath and if you genuinely feel happy to see someone with a smile. So, here's the difference. Nervous hello, this is the one I don't want you to do. Hello. Here's the happy hello. Hello. Notice how both sound like me, but one is more in my natural voice tone. I highly recommend before you answer the phone, before you hop on a video call, before you walk into the office, before you walk into a room, before you walk on a date, you say hello on the out breath.

[11:13] That immediately relaxes your vocal cords and make sure you're not accidentally hitting that highest end of your range. How do we signal competence in just a few seconds? This is actually more about disarming someone. When we can see someone's palm, we know they're not hiding anything from us. It literally shows the intention of I'm open to you. I could reach out and shake your hands. I could acknowledge you. So, when you walk on stage, hop on video, walk into a room, I want you to do a palm flash. Morning. Good to see everyone. Hi everyone, or come on over. Hey, good to see you. Sit with me. We love a palm because I think from back from our caveman days, it made us feel like someone wasn't hiding something from us. See what happens when I put my hands behind my back. Imagine if I were to teach this entire video not showing my hands. Your brain would begin to get distracted with the fact that you couldn't see my hands. And that's because when we can't see someone's hands, we worry about their intention. You're like, "What are her hands doing back there?" And the moment I bring them

[12:13] back out, you're like, "Ah, I can trust her again." You want to have your hands visible the moment someone can first see you. So, avoid those pockets. I know they're comfy. Avoid hiding them in a purse or behind a computer or a clipboard. Make sure your hands are visible, especially in those first few seconds. One of my absolute favorite sweet spot cues, it's both warm and competent, is gaze. Now, the amount of gaze you make varies from culture to culture. But, what we do know is that when humans make eye contact, we also produce oxytocin. So, let's say that you can't shake hands with someone or you are in a culture that doesn't touch. Making eye contact is also a great way to produce that chemical of connection. Now, in Western cultures, we like to have eye contact about 60 to 70% of the time. And that means you shouldn't be making 100% eye contact. It's very natural to think and look away or look around the room or glance away if you're processing something. The key here is that you are making eye contact when you are making an important point, and you're making eye contact when they are

[13:14] making an important point. Try to hit that 60 to 70% sweet spot if you can. So, let's break down where we are in the interaction so far. You've entered into a room or hopped on video. They see you. You do a palm flash. Great, they can trust you, you're making gaze, maybe you reach out and touch, high five, handshake, hug. The next thing you want to be aware of is fronting. Fronting is angling your torso, your toes, your head towards the person you're speaking with. We really like to feel like we're on parallel lines with someone. So, when you're interacting, even if you're in a group, if you can angle your body towards the person that's speaking, it's like a nonverbal sign of respect. It's literally showing I am physically on the same page as you and therefore we can connect more deeply. Now, let me teach you the cue that kills any momentum, any charisma, any warmth, any competence. It's blocking. Oh, I know. I know crossing our arms is so comfortable. But the moment I cross my arms, I probably came across as more close-minded to you. Research even shows that the longer I

[14:15] close my arms, the more close-minded my own thinking becomes. Anti-blocking or opening up your torso, making sure you're not blocking any part of your torso, is a way of signaling I literally want to open up to you. It also helps your own thinking. So, try as much as you can, unless it's cold, to make sure that you have your torso open, your arms uncrossed. Don't hold a book or a coffee mug or a computer or a clipboard in front of your body. You want to have your torso open because it signals openness to them. Let's talk for a minute about nervousness. Look, I'm a recovering awkward person and I tend to be a social overthinker. So, my nerves can definitely get the best of me. And here's what I want you to keep in mind. One, you showing up as warm and competent with clear signals of trust and effectiveness is contagious. It actually helps other people feel warm and competent, too. So, first, why don't you focus on putting others at ease? That could help your own nervousness. But second, this is not

[15:16] about having a perfect first impression. There is no such thing. This is not about being perfectly charismatic. Again, there is no such thing. What we actually want to show is that we are real, we are human. An aspect of warmth is vulnerability. If you're feeling nervous or anxious or afraid, you can say that. It's one of the reasons why I say in my first impression, it's literally the opening line of my book, I'm a recovering awkward person. So, if you're feeling vulnerable or not your best, it's okay to say that. That's an aspect of warmth. Look, I don't want you to overthink these cues. In fact, you can start with one at a time. And the best way to do this is actually on the phone first. I know this sounds crazy, but on the phone, all you have is your voice and your words. So, start with just your happy hello, right? Practice answering the phone not hello, just hello. Then move your way to video. Video touch isn't an option, so we add gaze, gaze with the camera, and yes, research shows that we can even produce oxytocin even through a webcam. You can also start with a palm flash. So, now you have three cues, your happy hello, your palm

[16:18] flash, and your gaze. Then go to in person and start low pressure. Your best friends, your family. Practice that hug with them, see how it feels. Get feedback on your handshake. Practice fronting with them as they're speaking. That way we're starting off in low pressure settings, from phone, video, in person, friends first. At first, some of these cues might feel a little uncomfortable. It's kind of like retraining your muscle memory. But here's the good news is after you've tried a cue a few times and you get the positive feedback of someone opening up to you when you show openness, it will begin to feel like habit. Soon, after a couple of times of times of trying, it will not feel like you even have to think about anti-blocking or think about handshake or think about gaze. Go through those first few times of discomfort of retrying on a cue and trying to activate that muscle memory because it will become natural. Now, there are so many cues to choose from, but these are starter cues. They're the ones that have the biggest bang for their buck and hopefully will

[17:19] feel natural after you try them a couple of times. But note, if you try a cue five, 10 times and it still doesn't feel natural to you, don't do it. I never want you to feel inauthentic. In fact, I want you to use cues that feel empowering where you're like, yes, I finally feel like my most confident self. If it doesn't feel good to use it after a few tries, it's not for you. >> Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, >> >> ad-free.
