TITLE: The story you told about your trauma is making it worse | Rachel Yehuda
VIDEO ID: y_790Abbiek
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y_790Abbiek
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-16
DURATION: 20:42
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:06] Hi, I'm Rachel Yehuda and I study post-traumatic stress disorder and the effects of trauma including intergenerational trauma. How MDMA can aid therapy. Once you start thinking about trauma as a prison, we're all kind of doomed because traumatic experiences are here to stay and we shouldn't view them as prison. We should view them as simply an occurrence because that's what they are. And of course traumatic experiences are going to be very challenging and they have the power to be extremely disruptive and they have the power to produce a lot of mental health symptoms. But there are ways to also be resilient. There are ways to cope with trauma and there are ways to do amazing things not only despite the trauma but because of the trauma. When we talk about using psychedelic psychotherapy to heal from trauma and to heal from post-traumatic stress disorder,

[01:07] what we're really trying to do is use the power of psychedelics to induce kind of an altered state to help people do the work of trauma-focused therapy that is often very hard to do when you're in an ordinary state of consciousness. The reason that it's so hard for people in the aftermath of a trauma is not only because something terrible has just happened but because they construct a narrative about why it happened and what they did wrong as a result of it happening. But a woman who's been exposed to interpersonal violence can get the impression that maybe if she would have fought harder or worked harder or didn't send certain signals into the stratosphere that she could have prevented this. Or that she was maybe too passive and didn't fight as hard as she could have. And this is really what's sustaining the post-traumatic stress disorder. It's not just that she was violated but that she

[02:10] disappointed herself in her own actions. Even something like 9/11, which was 20 years ago, had a lot of people who wondered whether trying to run and save themselves was the best course of action. Maybe they should have gone back and maybe they should have helped other people struggling to get out of the burning building. So there's a lot of room after a traumatic exposure to kind of second-guess yourself. And what happens is that this narrative can be perpetuated every time you think about the traumatic event, which can be very often. And you start to believe that the problem isn't only what happened but it's you. When you use conventional therapies to try to get at these, we call them altered cognitive schemas, altered cognitions. When you try to use cognitive behavioral therapies to get people to look at some of these ideas, what happens is that they can get very very distressed. And so many times they give up on the therapy. And right now we have cognitive

[03:12] behavioral therapies for PTSD that can work quite well for people but also equally many people find that these therapies are just too emotionally draining or too distressing for them. A lot of trauma survivors with PTSD feel really alienated. They feel different. They try to avoid people. Sometimes it's because they don't want to hurt the ones that they love because they feel inside that they're very aggressive. Or they don't want to get really too close to someone that they were once close to because that person might start asking questions. And the trauma survivor doesn't want to give them horrific details about what happened to them. Mostly out of protecting the person or out of this feeling that once a person understands what happened to them, they may not want to see them the same way. It's distancing and all the partner experiences is that they've

[04:14] lost their loved one in some fundamental way that sometimes they can't even name. MDMA is now undergoing kind of the last stage before FDA approval. And in phase two and phase three studies, MDMA has shown remarkable efficacy for reducing symptoms of PTSD. And about two-thirds of people that are treated report no longer having PTSD. And also report feeling changed in a very positive direction. That's a very very high rate of recovery for any kind of a treatment and that's why it's exciting. MDMA is not a classic psychedelic. It's It works very differently than say psilocybin, which is commonly referred to as magic mushrooms or LSD or ayahuasca. Those experiences produce a much more dramatic out-of-body experience or

[05:17] mystical experience or even a sense of that you might even have an ego dissolution, your sense of self and maybe blending into a larger cosmos. Those experiences can be very very powerful. I think those kinds of psychedelics can and should be tried in PTSD and they might be very interesting. But they're different because while you're having those kind of experiences, it's hard to do psychotherapy. It's hard to be coherent in a sentence. A lot of the healing work with um those kind of classic psychedelics are occurring really after in integration, which is usually very short in clinical trials. But ideally the material that is brought up in that kind of a session can be talked about for a long time in therapy. With MDMA-assisted psychotherapy, a lot of the therapeutic work is being done in the session while you're in the altered state because you can be coherent, because you are not

[06:19] having an ego dissolution experience. Most people but not all experience a sense of pleasure. It's called ecstasy. It gives your body a good feeling sometimes. Some people during the session can also report feeling not so good. Sometimes people say, "I don't know why they call this ecstasy." But that's because they're also re-experiencing very difficult memories. But being in a situation where you feel calm and serene can have different effects in different people. But being in a state where you're not so worried about getting agitated can be very helpful for processing traumatic memories. So for example, a woman who's been exposed to interpersonal violence as an adult or even a child may be able to look past the self-blame and the and the disappointment that she feels in herself to really seeing that really she was helpless. Really the responses that she made at the time were the ones that were most

[07:20] conducive to keeping her alive. But instead of just understanding this intellectually, which is what happens in cognitive behavioral therapy, she feels it as a truth. She sees it in a different and more powerful way and she sees it in a way that is also infused with compassion for herself. And similarly, a combat veteran might also be able to understand that the monster that he feels that is now inside of him is actually a monster he can let go of because that part of him that was aggressive saved him in a situation where it was life or death and also was brought about by the need to provide service to keep others alive, which is an extraordinary thing that combat veterans, certainly in the United States and also around the world, often do voluntarily. Being in a state that is induced by a psychedelic such as MDMA

[08:23] may enhance your empathy for yourself, your introspection, your ability to see things differently and also make you feel part of the world. The idea of the cognitive behavioral therapies has always been really correct. The The idea is to kind of go back there and correct some of the faulty assumptions that you have about yourself in the world as a result of the traumatic experiences. Why they didn't work as well as we had hoped they would work for as many people as we had hoped they would work for is because some of the things that happened to people are really horrible. And so going back and trying to discuss this in an ordinary state of consciousness is just too much for people. So a lot of times I'm I'm certainly aware of this, people engage in cognitive behavioral therapy and they talk about a trauma but it isn't the trauma because they just can't bear to go into something so deeply distressing and so many people have had aspects of a

[09:24] traumatic experience that they can talk about but that they hold something back. In our society, unfortunately, we have given some people the message um perhaps unintentionally or unwittingly that if they would have only done something different during a traumatic experience, it wouldn't have happened. They might have been able to prevent it. I remember my mother telling me that when the Holocaust survivors came from Europe to Israel after the war, a lot of people asked them why they went like lambs to the slaughter. And there were so many of you, there were so few of the Nazis. Like, how did you let this happen? Obviously, that's really not the right thing to say to a trauma survivor. Um what it does though is it makes you wonder, well why did I go to war like a lamb to slaughter? Under the influence of a psychedelic, you may really understand that you had absolutely no choice with all those machine guns firing at you and aimed at

[10:26] your loved one. And if you didn't march, they would die. So, we create a lot of narratives in our society sometimes that suggest to people that they have choices during a trauma that they may not have. Plus which we don't often understand that the biological reality of the fight-or-flight response is really to try to preserve one's life. You're not really stepping through this um cognitive process um at the time of a trauma. You're just trying to survive. I think part of the reason that we sometimes do second-guess trauma survivors is because of our own um difficulty hearing traumatic material. And in fact, the reason it's important for people with severe PTSD to go and seek therapy is because you do have to be trained to kind of not have these reactions to somebody's trauma and to listen non-judgmentally and with extraordinary empathy and compassion for

[11:26] someone as they're as they're telling their tale. What most people find when they really go into a deep state um where they have empathy and when they are in the presence of therapists that can help them process the traumatic experience is that they actually were heroes. That they survived something that was designed to kill them or hurt them. And that they did so as best as could be expected in the time. And that the reason they did so is because life is worth living. And that now they can kind of take some of that and try to regain that will to live without worrying that they may um be horribly defective not only because of what the trauma did, but because of because of who they were, that they weren't able to overcome the experience of adversity. So, in part, there's a

[12:28] cultural message in a societal message here that we need to really let trauma survivors know that we understand how difficult it was and really embrace their survival and adaptation. But sometimes we live in a society that's pretty judgmental. And so, that can add fuel to the fire. When combat veterans returned home from the Vietnam War, I think one of the biggest contributors to their ongoing symptoms and their subsequent readjustment was being called baby killers. Um that is a great example of how to not help somebody get over uh combat trauma. So, thanking people for their service and understanding the absolutely impossible situation that somebody is in is more appropriate to helping combat survivors heal because it reminds them that they were doing a mission perhaps at an extraordinary cost. One of the ways that I like to think about how a psychedelic um assists the

[13:29] psychotherapy process is really based on a quote from Stan Grof which says that a psychedelic is to the brain what the telescope is to astronomy or the microscope is to biology. It just allows you to go deeper and see things that perhaps you couldn't ordinarily see. And I think that's exactly why these um compounds have so much potential and particularly MDMA for PTSD because it allows you to get past this initial layer that you can't see which is how did I let this happen? Or how could this have happened to me? And go to that next layer that perhaps is perhaps is more microscopic, which is because I couldn't do anything else, because I had no other options. And also develop that sense of self-compassion that allows you to understand that you don't need to be punished or punish yourself because you didn't live up to your own expectations for how you should have behaved.

[14:31] I think the most important thing to let people know about psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy, if you're using it for the purpose of healing from mental health symptoms, is that intention is very important. It's not only intention, it's the desire to go deeper than you've been able to go. On some level, you have to have this sense that I know I need to be going deeper, I just can't. It's too upsetting, it's too traumatic, it's too difficult. And really using the medicine for what it is there to do, which is help you see that thing that you can't see with your naked eye and really wanting to see it. The MDMA or any psychedelic really um won't have healing properties if you're afraid to have the experience or if you're reluctant about it. It's like saying, well, I'm going to look through the telescope, but I'm also going to put my um hand on the back of the telescope because I'm really kind of afraid of what I might see.

[15:31] There are ways to be avoidant even using a psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy. It's very important to not give people the impression that there's a passive cure. You lie down there on the bed, you take MDMA, you swallow it with some water, and magical things start to happen in terms of processing trauma. That isn't what that therapy is about. Ideally, therapists who really know how to work with trauma in an in an ordinary state can use those tools and techniques to help you do the work of pushing forward while you are in um the state induced by MDMA and could really kind of help you supercharge the psychotherapy. So, the way that this is being rolled out for PTSD is more medicalized. It is um that's not to say that people won't have good experiences with psychedelics that are taken outside of that context. People really um show a range of

[16:32] different experiences ranging from this saved my life to I'm not doing that again, that was pretty bad. Psychedelics are really interesting that way. So much of how they're going to work has to do with where you are, who you're with, what your intention is, and also probably your internal biochemistry. So, there's no way to really predict it. Even though this treatment has been found to work in 2/3 of people with PTSD there's this other third. So, everyone that tries this treatment has to understand that people respond very differently to different kind of medications and to and to make sure that you're working with somebody really ethical and can respect your uh boundaries. Anyone that is in an altered state of consciousness is more vulnerable. And so, you really want to make sure you're working with people of the highest not only therapeutic skill, but ethical standards. What's fascinating about psychedelics is that the same person can have remarkably different responses in different settings.

[17:32] When we talk about MDMA-assisted psychotherapy uh for PTSD we're talking about a process where there's readiness where we prepare people to work with the medicine. We talk a lot about what the experience will be like and what they want to get out of it and what some of the stuck points have been. What their hopes are for getting past those stuck points. There are three 90-minute sessions to do that. Not to mention that these our patients you might have known and have tried to work with for a long time before the MDMA-assisted psychotherapy. And then you work during the session and you work after the session. And the way that the MDMA-assisted psychotherapy is structured right now, there are going to be three medicine sessions. So, you have three very long days to kind of get where you need to go. And hopefully, you can make great strides um with it. But for anyone that thinks this is a quick fix, that's a perception that needs to be corrected because the way

[18:33] that it's being rolled out right now with clinical trials with the FDA is a 3-month experience with 12 psychotherapy sessions in addition to the medication sessions. It's a commitment um that somebody is making towards their own healing and working in a very non-passive way um to try to really understand what it is they saw so that they can make something out of it and um tackle their lives in a different way. When people hear this kind of stuff about how great MDMA-assisted psychotherapy is or psychedelics um there are psychedelic experiences in general and they have a natural curiosity to want to try it or they want to see if they can learn more about themselves. I mean, that's a a very natural reaction. It's important to understand that um not everybody responds the same way. It's important to adjust one's expectations of this and and really be in the hands of somebody that is very uh

[19:35] trusted. Different states in the United States are experimenting with um different levels of decriminalization and legalization. So, I suspect that we will have a lot more information about the effects of psychedelics in the general population. When you think about psychotherapy, that was initially meant for people that had serious mental health issues, and a lot of people go for psychotherapy even if they don't have a mental health disorder. We may see after we have enough experience with um psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy uh in clinical populations, that might be a very natural transition. That it might be particularly helpful and and maybe easier in some ways uh for people that don't have as intransigent mental health symptoms, uh but just really want to understand themselves better. So, it's an exciting time to see what the future brings. Want to support the channel? Join the

[20:36] Big Think Members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
