TITLE: Dupuytren's Contracture
AUTHOR: American Society for Surgery of the Hand
SOURCE URL: https://www.assh.org/handcare/condition/dupuytrens-contracture
RETRIEVED: 2026-08-23
PAGE COUNT: 3
======================================================================

[p.1] Dupuytren’s Contracture (1/3)
Dupuytren’s contracture is a disorder of the palm of 
the hand and fingers. In the normal hand there is a 
fibrous tissue called fascia. Fascia covers the impor-
tant nerves, blood vessels, muscles, and tendons. 
Fascia also stabilizes the skin. In Dupuytren’s disease, 
this fascia can become abnormal. It becomes thicker, 
forming cords. These cords are often mistaken for a 
tendon because they look and feel similar. Unlike a 
tendon that is moved by a muscle that shortens and 
lengthens, cord tissue is not connected to a muscle. 
Cord tissue is static and does not move. There may 
be a single cord or several. Cords can be separate or 
connected.
Most people with Dupuytren’s contracture will also 
have nodules or bumps in the hand. When they 
are first noticed, these nodules and cords may not 
change for a long time. They can also have a slow or 
fast change. Cords and nodules may become bigger 
and thicker over time. They may begin to pull the 
fingers into a bent (flexed) position so the fingers 
are bent toward the palm. This makes it impossible 
to fully open the fingers (Figures 1 and 2). This can 
become bothersome and limit use of the hand in 
many people.
Causes
The exact cause of Dupuytren’s contracture is un-
known and very complex. It is a hereditary disease. 
This means family history and ancestry play a role. 
The problem is more common in men, people over 
age 40, and people of Northern European descent. It 
is less common in African and Middle Eastern de-
scent. Smoking, diabetes, alcohol, lower body mass 
index, and aging are also all related to Dupuytren’s.
There is no evidence that hand injuries or specific 
jobs lead to a higher risk of developing Dupuytren’s 
contracture. There may be a mild relationship to 
trauma in someone who is at risk. Occasionally after 
a distal radius (wrist) fracture, a patient may develop 
a single nodule in the palm. This nodule may or may 
not be tender. It often does not progress to result in 
a bent finger joint.
Signs and Symptoms
Symptoms of Dupuytren’s contracture usually 
include lumps, nodules, and bands or cords on the 
Figure 1: Advanced case of Dupuytren’s Contracture 
with pits, nodules and cords leading to bending of the 
finger into the palm
© 2020 American Society for Surgery of the Hand | www.HandCare.org
Figure 2: Advanced case of Dupuytren’s Contracture 
with pits, nodules and cords leading to bending of the 
finger into the palm
palmar side of the hands. The lumps are generally 
firm and stuck to the skin of the palm. Skin can seem 
thicker and puckered. Think of the Dupuytren’s palm 
skin like a road. Some areas are swollen and puffy 
like a speed bump. In other areas the skin is puck-
ered and pulled down like a pothole. Thick cords 
may develop from the palm into one or more fin-
gers. These cords may cause bending of the fingers.

[p.2] Dupuytren’s Contracture (2/3)
© 2020 American Society for Surgery of the Hand | www.HandCare.org
The ring finger and little finger are most commonly 
involved. One or both hands can be affected. Each 
hand can be affected in a different pattern and at 
different times.
The lumps can be uncomfortable in some people. 
However; in most people, Dupuytren’s contracture is 
not typically painful. The disease may first be noticed 
due to difficulty in placing the hand flat on a surface 
(Figure 3) or opening the hand fully. It may be more 
difficult to wash hands, wear gloves, hold large 
objects, and get hands into pockets. When it involves 
the right hand, people can find it awkward to shake 
hands.
It is difficult to predict how the disease will progress. 
Some people have only small lumps or cords while 
others will develop severely bent fingers. There 
are a variety of risk factors. The disease tends to 
be more severe if it occurs at an earlier age. Men 
develop more severe symptoms when compared to 
women. If you have many relatives with the problem, 
you may be at higher risk for more severe disease. 
If there are changes in other areas of the body, you 
are at higher risk. This is called Dupuytren’s diathesis. 
Lumps and cords can develop on the soles of the 
feet (plantar fibromatosis) or the genital location in 
men (Peyronie’s disease). Occasionally, the disease 
will cause thickening on top of the knuckles called a 
knuckle pad (or Garrod’s pad).
Treatment
The presence of a lump in the palm does not mean 
that treatment is required or that the disease will 
progress. Also, not all lumps in the palm are Dupuy-
tren’s. Therefore, it can be helpful to see a hand sur-
geon for an examination. Sometimes a history and 
examination is all that is needed to evaluate a mass. 
Other times, imaging such as an x-ray, ultrasound, or 
MRI may be indicated. Some factors that are impor-
tant in evaluating masses include their size, “feel” 
(such as firm or squishy), location, presence of pain, 
movement of mass or skin around the mass, family 
history, and other medical conditions that may be 
present. In mild cases, especially if hand function 
is good, only observation is needed. Splinting or 
stretching typically does not prevent worsening of 
the contracture but is safe to try.
For contractures that become bothersome, there 
are nonsurgical and surgical options. These are 
typically discussed when the contracture prevents 
the hand from lying flat on a table. A hand surgeon 
(either a trained orthopaedic surgeon, plastic sur-
geon, or a general surgeon) can discuss the most ap-
propriate method based upon the stage and pattern 
of the disease and the joints involved. The goal of 
treatment is to improve finger motion and function. 
Complete correction of the fingers may not always 
happen. Even with treatment, the disease is not fully 
curable. The nodules and cords may come back in 
the same or a different location. Before treatment, 
the hand surgeon will discuss realistic goals and pos-
sible risks. It is important to make sure the patient 
will understand this problem and both short- and 
long-term expectations.
Nonsurgical Treatment
One nonsurgical treatment option for Dupuytren’s 
contracture is called needle fasciotomy (or needle 
aponeurotomy). This can be safely done in the medi-
cal office or a procedure room. The patient is usually 
fully awake. The hand and finger are injected with a 
numbing medicine. In a few minutes when the skin is 
numb, a needle is inserted below the skin to cut the 
cord in several locations. The physician then slowly 
stretches the hand and fingers to break the cord. 
This allows the hand to be straight again. It is not 
unusual to develop small tears of the skin that heal 
over a few weeks. The recovery is only a few days. 
The hand can be used as much as the patient is com-
fortable. The wounds must be protected to reduce 
risk of infection. This procedure does not remove 
Figure 3: Table top test for Dupuytren’s Contracture

[p.3] Dupuytren’s Contracture (3/3)
© 2020 American Society for Surgery of the Hand | www.HandCare.org
the cord fully from below the skin. Roughly one third 
of patients will see the cord eventually come back 
after this procedure.
Another office procedure option is a two-step pro-
cedure that includes a collagenase injection. This is 
similar to needle fasciotomy. Instead, it uses an in-
jectable drug called collagenase to dissolve the cord. 
The physician will inject the cord at the first visit 
with the medication. Many patients will experience 
some swelling, bruising of the hand, and pain after 
the injection. To limit these symptoms the hand is 
often wrapped in a bulky dressing. The patient is also 
instructed to elevate the hand and limit use. Some-
times oral medications are advised such as acet-
aminophen, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug. 
The second visit is usually one or a few days later. At 
that visit, the hand and fingers will be injected again. 
This time a numbing medication is placed for com-
fort. A few minutes later, the physician will slowly 
stretch out and straighten the finger joints to break 
the cord. Some patients may develop small tears in 
the skin. Similar to needle fasciotomy, the recovery 
is only a few days to a few weeks. The hand can be 
used normally almost immediately once the swelling 
goes down and the numbing medication wears off. 
This does not remove the cord fully from below the 
skin, and one third of patients will see the cord come 
back. Talk to your doctor about your eligibility to 
receive this injection.
Splinting and therapy may be used to help keep the 
hand and fingers straight after the treatment is com-
pleted. The main reason to undergo treatment is to 
increase your ability to straighten the finger. How-
ever, it is also very important to work on your ability 
to make a fist during recovery.
Surgical Treatment
There are several surgical treatments for Dupuy-
tren’s contracture. Painful nodules can be treated by 
opening the skin and carefully removing them. There 
are two procedures to treat the cords. One is called 
a fasciotomy where the tight cords are cut but not 
removed. This is less invasive as only a small cut or 
cuts are used. Because all the tissue is not removed, 
there is possibly a higher chance the contracture 
could return. The other type of surgery involves both 
cutting the cords and removing as much of the nod-
ule, cords, and even diseased skin in the hand. This is 
called a fasciectomy. This often has longer wounds 
with more extensive dissection.
A surgical plan will be created that is specific to each 
patient. Surgery can be performed with the patient 
asleep or awake using a variety of anesthesia tech-
niques. This is out-patient or same-day surgery. This 
means you will go home the same day. The skin is 
usually closed with stitches, but sometimes portions 
of the skin are left open to prevent any recurrence 
of the nodules. Because of the surface area cut, hav-
ing blood on the dressings is normal at the first few 
dressing changes. The hand and fingers are usually 
much improved in their ability to straighten (Figure 
4). However, this improvement may not maintained 
forever.
After surgery, splinting and hand therapy (either 
physical therapy or occupational therapy) are often 
very helpful in order to improve function of the af-
fected finger. While surgical treatment may be more 
effective, the recovery is longer. The recovery time 
for fasciectomy surgery is usually about 6 weeks. 
The hand can be used during this time. It is helpful 
for patients to set aside time multiple times per day 
to perform exercises, use a splint, or attend therapy 
sessions. Waiting until weeks or months after sur-
gery to begin therapy may result in stiffness. The 
more the patient does soon after surgery, the more 
successful the final result will be.
