TITLE: Heinrich Seegenschmiedt MD, "Review Of Radiotherapy For Morbus..." 2010 Miami Dupuytren Symposium
VIDEO ID: oXR_NOAaSa0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oXR_NOAaSa0
UPLOAD DATE: 2010-10-15
DURATION: 17:03
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:03] So, try to keep everybody attentive. Um I would like to start out being 25 years in business examining Dupuytren's patients, not only the hands but also the feet. And that's the conclusions from these 25 years. Um I can get my thing done here. Okay, I hope it's the right direction. No, it's not the right direction. Don't start the clock now. Okay, I have a financial disclosure. The only dependency I have is my family. And as you can see, I'm not meeting Charlie. It's only five children. And together we are seven. As it was phrased before, uh there are many diseases which turn around this fibroblast and myofibroblast. And radiation therapy has been proven to be effective in many other sites than just Dupuytren's and Ledderhose. And Paul Werker already mentioned it's keloids. And one of the driving forces in this is inflammation and it's scarring, it's

[01:06] repair. And radiosensitive cells are lymphocytes. They react to very low doses of radiation and fibroblasts. They are proliferating cells like tumor cells. So, radiation therapy is a very convenient method to interfere with fibroblast activity. As I show you the modern situation of keloid treatment, we have young women who want to get nicer breasts with results that about 15% of them end up with ugly scars. And radiation therapy helps them to get nicer breasts. And it's a decision of having ugly breasts or having potentially low increased risk of cancer. And on the other hand, we have piercing coming up. And again, it's an increasing entity and radiation therapy plays a decisive role to give surgery the ability to repair a situation which was not repaired before. However, as regards to Dupuytren's, it's

[02:08] important that we start radiation at a very early phase. And probably radiation is the only method you have right now to interfere in the early stage. And this is a mis- misinterpretation of radiation in textbooks like Brenner's. He's showing you ugly so-called radio necrosis. I have seen this picture. None of them is a radio necrosis. Patient might have been treated in the past, but radio necrosis are situations where you have irradiated and then tissue necrotizes. This was tissue never healing after operation. And this may be due to a result of surgery. May be interfering with radiation. So, this is a complete misinterpretation of radiotherapy data, and there have been faults in the past with radiotherapy as well, which I will show you. It's clear that in the nodules, you have a high amount of fibroblasts, and that's the key role, the nodule and the

[03:09] fibroblast. And as I want to mention, it's only this tissue and it's this stage when radiation is effective. If you treat in a situation with 30 and 40° angle, it's already scarred tissue. In this situation, radiation plays no role. And if radiation therapists give radiation to that stage, it's a mistake. The only stage amenable to radiotherapy is the phase when fibroblasts are proliferating. And one of the really nice proofs being shown was the group by Rodemann in Tübingen. And what they basically showed, that the fibroblast and the myofibroblast have about 50 cycles in the lifetime of a human to proliferate. And in within a damaged system, these fibroblasts will continue to proliferate, become myofibroblasts, and in the end, if they come in the post-mitotic phase, they get the contracture.

[04:10] So, by interfering with this change in differentiation, you will stop the process of proliferation. You will stop the nodule formation. You will stop the cord formation. So, that means if you interfere in that circle, in this cascading process, early enough, with a agent which is able to interfere with proliferation, then that's the choice to go for early intervention. And here is just the summary of the slides. Non-irradiated irradiated tissue, as you see in the upper row, is much less. It's just a sham treatment. In the lower row, you see it's a dramatic change in the apoptotic rate in the interference with differentiation. I don't tell you more details. It can be read up in the group of Rodemann. Just put it into Google and you see wonderful papers he has published 10 years ago and 5 years ago. So, the key question is, and this you see, you had the Tubiana classification

[05:11] just because you want to know stage one to stage two. That's the sensitive phase where you go and give operation because this hand is in an advanced situation in terms of malfunctioning. For radiation therapy, it's important to give a little other staging system. Just think of 10° being the limit for radiation to be given. And then that's clear. Go for radiation therapy in the early phase when you have no extension deficit, when you just have the nodules and the beginning extension deficit. That's the only stage when radiation should be given, no later. And that's the stole story. On the right side you see on on the lower part you see that the disease evolves within months, years, and decades. And on the ordinate you see the grades. And usually the whole society and the whole world waits until you have an extension deficit to 30 or 45 degree and then you

[06:12] go in. But this disease before that is already proliferating, it's going on. And what you usually give a recommendation to the patients, wait until you have an extension deficit and then I operate you. What an ugly advice. Why should patients wait? When you have a target cell amenable to treatment. And that's exactly what is what I want to respond in the end. Looking back into the literature, there had been several retrospective data, but no control on the inclusion criteria, no control on the dosage, and certainly indications at a later stage were not effective. And what it was clear with the Erlangen study which I participated from the early on '85 and examined patients and tried to methodize the way of documenting disease. It was clear that with the more advanced stages radiation would have much less effect and that has been proven now with long-term analysis up to 15 years.

[07:12] So the indication in my point is if a patient comes to me and presents with Dupuytren's and he said I have it for 5 years and there's no change, he's not been treated, it's a dormant situation. I do all the examination, I follow him, I tell him come back within 6 months or 12 months and then we look for changes. And that's the important part to detect the early stage when patients really proliferate and get clinical changes. If If see a beginning deficit, it's high time to do something. Poor surgical outcome on the contralateral hand and beginning disease on the other hand is a good sign to give radiation in an early stage. And it might be interesting to use radiation after you have a very early relapse, let's say within a month or 2 months you see notes growing because fibroblasts are the driving force in this stage as well. So, what we did in at the University of Essen or at my former place, I think seven more than 600 patients over the last 14 years.

[08:15] 412 of these patients are now followed up for more than 5 years. And the data I'm presenting is for those patients with a minimum follow-up of 5 years. Patients decided themselves to receive radiation or being controlled. When they decide for radiation, they were randomized in the lower dose arm, B, 7 * 3 gray, or they get the traditional 10 * 3 gray higher dose situation. On the photograph, you can see that usually we provide around the palpable changes, cords or notes, a margin of 2 cm longitudinal and 1 cm lateral. That were our radiation portals. When we looked now, last follow-up examined at the end of 2009, extending follow-up 14 years longest, minimum 5 years, we could see in the control hands a progression rate of 61%. Progression was any additional nodule, any additional cord, any additional

[09:16] extension deficit. And those who required surgery within this period were 31%. Radiation therapy in the lower dose group had progression of 23% and required surgery in 12%. And radiation with the higher dose had a progression rate of 18% required surgery in 7%. With this indication and with the selection of data, for my point, it's the proof that radiation is able in early stage disease to control and prevent progression and probably delay operation in the whole run over the time. In multivariate analysis, we found that radiation versus control is highly significant. It's the highest odd odds ratio which can be achieved. And the second one is stage of disease. So, even the 10° or 20° is much less effective than the zero situation. And in addition, uh smoking plays in

[10:18] univariate a role and also finger involvement plays a role. So, it's a more extensive disease. So, in summary for Dupuytren's, we would say control probably three times better control with regard to surgery and probably 2.5 times better control with radiation with regard to any time of progression. And this was very low acute toxicity and chronic toxicity. Chronic toxicity is a little bit dry skin. And I'm collaborating with a hand surgeon which is quite known to the German society. It is uh uh Klaus Steffens who is working in Essen. He was trained by Professor Koup and he told me with regard to potential side effects after operating a irradiated patient. He tells me, "Heinrich, I have so many difficult cases to operate. Most of them have never received radiation. It's just a matter of having a difficult disease to be operated on." And he basically operates on all my

[11:20] cases. We have no healing problem at all because he's a very diligent and good surgeon to go with. The other question is most hand surgeons never examine the feet. And the podiatrist never examine the hands. I have never seen literature doing the ratio being between. I can tell you from my data 50% of all Ledderhose patients have Dupuytren's disease. And about 20% of Dupuytren's patients have Ledderhose disease. And I have all sorts of risk factors which you mentioned like nicotine abuse or have examined families or diabetes or epilepsy medication. It's all in the database and we can examine and look for that in the long run. So the question is the plantar fascia is different and interestingly enough the disease is not on the fourth digit, it's on the first and the second due to other mechanical forces which had been shown before. What is the usual management on the

[12:20] foot? Local excision with a relapse rate of 85%. You don't see large tears in surgery of the foot because of this dismal results. Most of the patients require secondary and tertiary surgery ending up in subtotal excision and again even in this disease you have a 50% relapse rate. So the question is having this complication rate, is there any successful treatment for Morbus Ledderhose? Yes, it is. We have seen 143 patients in exactly the same period and as you see it's about 20% 25% of this population. Uh 138 of them had more than one year follow up. We had an equal distribution between male and female. There were uh more of them by lateral. 22 222 feet were involved. 54 were uninvolved so they were serving as control and other patients were serving as control because they don't want to receive radiation.

[13:22] So we gave local radiotherapy not randomized because it's a uh first evaluation study. that was the schedule five times three gray, a break after eight to 12 weeks another schedule of five times three gray because it's a slow progressing disease and you have to add slow times when you give radiation. That's the treatment, very simple. The cost of this treatment with orthovoltage is about 300 euro in Germany. If you use it with linear accelerators, it's about 600 euros. So, it's 1/10 of the cost you have with any type of surgery plus recurrence surgery. So, it's easy to apply. You have also in any country you have radiation therapy facilities available. What was the toxicity? We got grade one toxicity in 21% and the clinical response chronic was the same, dry skin, nothing else. No ulcer, no carcinogenesis at that time because there is poor carcinogenesis,

[14:23] very very low figures in the hand at all. You may expose your hands for a whole daily lifetime in sunlight and you won't really get high numbers of basal cell carcinoma. They occur in different. So, the hand is very endurable versus cancer risk. Clinical response was in only 11% had progress after treatment. While while the control group had 34% progress, so three times more progress. We got objective remission, that means nodule reduction, complete reduction in about 50% of the patients and we got symptomatic relief in more than 2/3 of the patient. Itching, tension sensation, pressure sensation and also reduction of pain. People could walk again normally when they had pain before. So, combination with more distributive as I showed you, very high about 50% salvage surgery after radiotherapy was possible. There was about 85% of patients stating

[15:26] that they had a better quality of life after radiation. That was 1 year evaluation. And what I wanted to point out, radiation is effective, reduces the necessity of surgery. We have long-term data and I know from the surgical series, they are not very studies around with minimum follow-up data of 5 years. So the future in my point is to study the lowest dose which is achievable for certain subtypes of Dupuytren's. And it's also interesting to look into this final slide. You remember, this is the traditional pathway of treating. You await a situation when you need surgery to improve function and you know you don't cure the disease. You just want to preserve function. So why not preserve function at a much earlier stage with a situation where you really have a target cell and when you can interfere with the target cell mechanism. That's this situation. You may slow down progression and even that will delay operation. That's for

[16:28] the 20%. You may be stabilizing the disease. You will never require surgery. And for later holes at least we have 50% you reduce the situation. And I think this study should serve as a final statement to have a control study available that all over the world we should start this setting together as 10 surgeons as a radiation therapist and try to set up a very diligent way to document the disease on both sides. Thank you very much.
