TITLE: Dr. Paul Zidel, "Dupuytren's versus burn..." 2010 Miami Dupuytren Symposium Presentation
VIDEO ID: uR5OcoIKfOI
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uR5OcoIKfOI
UPLOAD DATE: 2010-09-11
DURATION: 16:25
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:05] My charge will be to discuss the burn hand contractor versus the dupitrins hand contractor and see if we could gain any insights into the mechanical treatment um oversight looking at the burn hand modalities as it relates to dupetrins and vice versa. I have no financial uh interest to disclose and the objectives really are although obviously much different the idea is just to generate some thought some wonder raise questions and perhaps gain some insight. We'll start with this premise. This premise comes from two sources. one, my program director, Dr. Robson, who's in the audience, had a unique gift of making us

[01:05] think. One day, we would have our thoughts that I'm very confident that A is the right answer to this problem. And he would convince us that we were wrong and it was B. And the next day, B was wrong and A is right. And I actually know Charlie's story uh both before and after he went to Paris and I believe I told him that he also was wrong. So naturally after realizing that I was wrong uh I went to Paris and I was fortunate to go with him and uh I think keeping an open mind is the key both in this whole presentation. So can we learn anything between burncore contraures and dupetrins contraurs? Well is it really comparing apples and oranges?

[02:06] Basically when people say that I think there are more similarities between apples and oranges than um non similarities. So basically this is food for thought and as Dr. Astraman briefly mentioned do uh Dupetrin's this is uh the closest I could get. I didn't have his 1832 monograph but uh dupetrins really in 1832 classified burns according to the depth and divided thermal injuries into different degrees of severity. So there is some relationship and I'm still not sure is it dupetrins or dupetrons do we have a consensus maybe at the end of this pres end of this symposium call it clients correct so if we go back um I won't belabor this slide but it's basically looking at the Oxford definition of

[03:09] contraure and Charlie uh talked talked about one of the prior symposium and the monograph there looked at Dr. Houston's questions but um he presented another one I think Dr. Ma was also at that conference because your talk was within that monograph and the questions really that really uh struck me was by Dr. Eceland, if I pronounced that correct and he said that dupetrins really spreads into or invades tissue like a malignant tumor, not a benign tumor. And why does that happen? And how does it go beyond the Palmer ainurosis and why in only certain spots? And why is the natural history so unpredictable? So the really question to me is does dupetitrin serve a purpose? I mean does

[04:10] it serve a purpose to have your fingers contracted? I'll talk about that in one second but I'm just adding two other uh Dr. Horizon also talked about the psychosocial aspects and with Charlie's large series and we talked about whether besides diabetes and other associated conditions that psychosocial um diiathesis should be part of that uh continuum and do these associations make a difference? We talked about maybe um the treatment will be based on if you have five diiatheses or other are the relation or the genetics of it will make the treatment different and how does that affect if you have dupitrins really with diabetes is the pattern different and hopefully we could learn from the large experience whether that makes a difference or not. Getting back to the

[05:13] question of does dupetrin's contractor serve a p a purpose. Uh Dr. Ryan in in the hand clinics talked briefly in one of his articles about the palmeris longus extending into palmerosis that it's a strange phenomenon that it's not really a it's a tenon but doesn'tert insert into bone and the only thing I could find out was that it was responsible for expose exposing claws in lower vertebrates now I haven't seen many in my practice lower vertebrates coming in with this problem, but we uh just food for thought. And this is the pomerapinerosis um extending from the palmaris longus into there. I just like the slide. It's a nice picture from our former mentor. You can see the pomearis longus merging into that

[06:14] palmosis. So here's the typical dupetrins contraure. Not bad, but we all have seen much worse ones, but pretty typical. And the small finger PIP is really a difficult problem. And this, if you notice this slide, this contraure here in the thumb. And to me that looks a little bit like this burn score contraure. I'm still waiting for a burn score contraure in someone with dupetrins but uh we'll see what that shows because that would be a a really interesting phenomenon how to look into that in terms of their genetic makeup and why do people scar so much. So I could have fooled you to say that one is a burn scar contractor, one's a

[07:14] dupetrance contractor, but the these are burn scar contractors and why did he in particular scar in that one particular area and these are all questions and why do people and Dr. Robs in particular, former president American burn association knows the severity of burns and children and certain other I guess you would call it a diiathesis scar so much almost kloid like but not really. So this is a baby that burns and this is the exact opposite of dupetrins where there was some controversy whether there's such a thing as a pediatric dupetrins patient but we know that uh babies as they grow for more contraurs and score excessively and can we learn can we take one field and and bring it back and forth between dupetrins and burns to uh

[08:17] learn about it. I I probably burn contractors predates I think the first report was by Prometheus and then you'll see that these burn score contractors can become quite deforming even more so than dupetrins. So what we can learn from dupetrins to extend it into the burn world would really be worth quite worthwhile. So what what is important? You know this whole symposium will be about how this happens and why it happens in prevention and restoration and what causes burns to become hypertrophic and hence at depending on the location contraures and why is dupetrins so variable now and please correct me if I'm wrong but hypertrophic scoring occurs

[09:19] virtually only in humans which makes it difficult. There may be one animal model but can the leap be made from these non-animals models or from lab work from um uh cell cultures into the real treatment options. So we look at different uh cellular aspects of fibrosis and use that as a guide looking at um collagen formation and different uh cellular factors and we look at the modulators of scar collagen both in dupetrins and other besides burns other contraure or scar forming problems. S we look at mechanical tension and how that differentiates fibiberblast into myofibrolast and what can be d done to

[10:19] alter that tension. Can we use the the models that in one respect say that stretching it actually causes more problems. So let's not use splints or yes we can use splints or can you take that cell culture and really make a a definitive statement or does it depend on how often you stress it? Is it cyclic? Is it continuous? This was a little study and they looked at human volunteers and found that the depth of the burn affects the regeneration versus repair and that the superficial fibroblasts act differently than deep fibroblasts as the injury went deeper into the skin. So the response really to the insult is different. And this one looking at mechanical strain really was a cell culture of fibroblasts from

[11:23] female breast reduction tissue. So it's important to take away part of the results but keep things in perspective. And there are different protocols that we use in the burn world that can be related to uh dupetitrins. And at this one looking at CPMs and flexions and spinting and arthritis. So I'll briefly tell you about some of the uh different treatments that were just mentioned. Pressure garment silicone splints and other recommendations for score management in the burn patient and in score management in general. So this is very straightforward. This uh for those of you who may not know this is just a serial cast little plaster and we use it in burns. We've tried it actually in

[12:24] some duprints. Um, and after a week or so, you just remove it and stretch it out a little further. This is a similar uh torture device whereby you slowly stretch it after you put your finger in it. This is volunteer and there are anecdotal reports of this dinosit working in dupetrin's patients but no long no significant controlled studies for such silicone gel has been used and pressure has been used I believe at Lorson in the 70s found out that the scar under a burn that had a splint seemed to have uh increased the third phase. The mature wound seemed to be softer and so they

[13:26] went to putting pressure on it with uh silicone or these jobs garment that some have silicone inside to put slow continuous pressure on the wounds to soften them. But in the long term, they almost end up the same, even though Job's garments are used universally for burns. And there are different aspects you could put inserts in to help reduce some of the hooding. And then there's u negative pressure the therapy the wound vac orenics which is actually not negative pressure subatmospheric pressure to stimulate growth in certain wounds that would be counterproductive but can easily be uh researched into looking at the subopul of cells and how they react differently to different pressure gradients within

[14:27] in the skin. And this is just an example of integra which is a bovine tendon collagen with uh other materials to act as a dermal substitute to prevent contraction. And there's, as you can see, there's a little silastaster silicone sheath that comes on the outside that you remove in about 3 weeks and then you close over with a skin graft or a cellular substitute. I think Dr. Oled will talk about that. And does continuous passive motion have any effect? You know, with our burn score contractors, we found that early CPM really makes a difference. and can that be incorporated into the treatment modalities for dupetrins. So there are a lot of things to do and then can it be stretched out? I think Dr. AG is going to talk about his

[15:29] experience and I'll just talk I'll show you one example of a device that we've used to slowly stretch up a severe burn contraure and you can see the gears here and seems to work quite well. It's difficult to get end results because in a child as they grow it they redevelop their contraure. But these are all modalities that could be used that hopefully can be um as mentioned trans referenced between burncore contractors and dupigence contractors. So thank you for listening thinking wondering
