TITLE: Dr. Zsolt Szabo: "Treatment of Dupuytren in different countries" 2015 Dupuytren Symposium
VIDEO ID: ZmQTAWOKqdA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZmQTAWOKqdA
UPLOAD DATE: 2015-11-20
DURATION: 15:43
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:01] Thank you very much for the possibility of being here and I would like really to congratulate to the organizers. And when you receive this task to be the first speaker and deliver the first lecture, then you have great ideas and you say I will do something fantastic because a good start is mandatory for a good conference. And then you look a little bit to the program, detail program, you see how famous and big speakers are speaking after you and you say oh my god, it will be difficult. So let's stop doing it in the right and normal way, let's do something interesting. And okay, so let's see. I have no conflict of interest, first of all. And then my liaison with the Dupuytren disease is a very long one because I remember in historic times when I took the European diploma examination in '97 in Bologna, one of the most important part of my examination, the oral examination, was on Dupuytren disease. And Philippe Saffar at the time was a very hard guy and asking me about the importance of

[01:01] check reins in PIP joint contractures due to Dupuytren disease. And started a very, very nice connection with me and Dupuytren. And then I had the chance when I became the examiner of the European diploma and then the head of the examination committee that people like Dupuytren disease. And when you speak about hand surgery, Dupuytren disease always there. And candidates for the examination were good in Dupuytren disease related questions and we examiners when we wanted to help candidates, we always ask something about Dupuytren disease. So Dupuytren was something jolly joker just like football and politics, everybody's an expert. So it was nice and then I had the chance having the big explosion because of the collagenase and because of Pfizer and then everybody was speaking about Dupuytren all around the world and that time I was the secretary general of FESSH and IFSSH and We really really had a lot of of chance to live

[02:02] those times. But after that, I decided now I will present you a non-randomized and absolutely non-scientific review. And as every review, it will start with collecting data. And as I'm traveling a lot, and I was involved in several different meetings and everywhere, I will present you some data I've collected, the most interesting data. So when I've asked in all around the world about Dupuytren disease, I had a lot of different answers. For example, the wicked disease, I'm not interested in my country, I've never seen it. For others, it's the most important income in their financial background because Dupuytren is a very good thing to make money. And when asking about etiology, real etiology, you may think it's it's a joke, but you will find doctors who still think that it's a contracture of the flexor tendons. And you will find other doctors who knows exactly the histological

[03:03] background of the disease. And when we discuss about diagnostic, data show that the majority people say, "What the hell is diagnostic? Is it a problem? You just have a look and you see it's a Dupuytren disease." And you have others who say, "No no, I need histology and I need ultrasounds and I need MRI and I need whatever I want." So it's very interesting when you have things diagnostic. Once you have your diagnostic, then treatment is coming. But who should treat this disease? And then if you travel around the world and collect data, you will see that there are parts of the world where rheumatologists are treating, and in other parts GPs are treating, and there are other countries where not only hand surgeons but specialized hand surgeons on Dupuytren are able to treat this disease. So in some places it's so important, in the places it's not important at all. So, where to treat? Then, it's about another very, very interesting question. Because in some countries, patient is coming, receiving treatment, going home in the afternoon or 1 hour later. In

[04:04] other countries, the patient will stay 1 or 2 weeks in hospital related to the treatment of Dupuytren's disease. So, where is the truth? Where is the midway? 3 days hospitalization is the ideal or what? So, when? I've encountered a lot of surgeons, a lot of doctors who said, "As early as possible." Because that's the logic, yes? You have a disease, it's early, you go for it. You have to save your patient. Is it good? And have others who said, "Oh, please don't touch when it's the young disease, because you worsen the situation. You have to wait till there is a contracture." So, again, it's very, very difficult to find where's the right way. And then, what to do? And when you discuss about what to do, this becomes most interesting and the most important. Because there are a lot of alternative alternative methods. People are believing more and more in so-called alternative methods. And there are others who said, "Oh, for Dupuytren, surgery is the only way to treat this disease." And it's easy. Why to discuss so much

[05:04] about that? It's There is a cord, break the cord. What You can choose whatever method you want and you solve the problem. What to discuss so much on genetics, background, and this and that? There is a cord, break it, you will have a happy patient, and that's all. It's solved. So, why to stay 2 days and speak about this Dupuytren? Then, of course, another option is let's make an amputation, and then you don't need any treatment of the Dupuytren. Of course, then there are fine and interesting publications and people who believe in the beneficial effect of the light and massage and ultrasounds and meditation. Because in some cases, meditation is very important in in in this disease. But if we speak seriously, alternative methods are existing from radiotherapy to collagenase, which these are not surgical procedures, and they really give us evidence-based data on the good outcome of the patients. And if we speak about surgery because the majority of the participants are surgeons, and we like surgery, and we

[06:07] like blood, then we can question if needle aponeurotomy surgery because there's not too much blood there. But, anyway, we consider it surgery, then we can start from needle aponeurotomy to the big blood giving open palm McCash technique. Then, we know that this is a disease of the fascia. So, let's take out only cut the fascia or take out all the fascia even using microscopes for taking out all the remnant parts of the fascia and doing three, four, five-hour operations with bloodless field release two times and put back and half day in operation theater because I've seen these kind of operations even from famous hand surgeons who were experts in the field. So, when there is a defect because in sometimes you have a lot of defects, you will find a found data from a simple Z-plasty to big full-thickness skin grafts to replace those defects. And postoperative care is another very important topic in discussing about Dupuytren. And I've encountered doctors

[07:08] who said, "What about postoperative care? If I do the operation, then patient's going home, moving his hand, using his hand. I do not need any kind of postoperative care." And then, I've seen other sides, some dynamic super splinting, and some physical therapy machines which looked like the commander table in the NASA for the space shuttle. So, it was really something super fantastic and sophisticated. And another very interesting thing about complications because all we are dealing with Dupuytren, we are afraid of complications. So, asking people all around the world about complications, you can find doctors who said, "What is that? I've never had a complication. Um if you have a Dupuytren, come to me, I solve it and no complication." And I've encountered surgeons who say, "Oh, every Dupuytren is disaster. I do it for hours and the patient is unhappy and there is Always I have injured nerves and tendons and everything. So, I really I I I'm about stopping to treat this disease." And another question is prognostic

[08:10] long-term and healed forever. Surgeons who do the operation, they never have recurrences and there are others who always have recurrences. So, we always can find doctors to stop because this this disease cannot be treated surgically because always comes back. And the future. Future is very interesting what we think about. And it starts from taking a pill and all disease is gone to genetic surgery when we will take our all our genes, replace a little piece in that and then Dupuytren disease will disappear. So, I had some conclusions on this big non-scientific study. And because I have to speak about how Dupuytren is looked all around the world. And I may say you that in the United States, they are clever. They produce and sell the collagenase. Scandinavian cities, they're rich. So, they buy the collagenase. And they do it and they produce it. France, poor France hand surgeons, they

[09:11] are in a very, very bad shape because all the Dupuytren case are taken by the rheumatologists who are doing needle aponeurotomy. And finally, a hand surgeon got a Dupuytren disease patient will do immediately fiber break operation because this is the only way to prevent recurrences. In Germany, they use radiotherapy because they know a lot about x-rays and they don't like collagenase because they say it's more very expensive for them. And then in UK they are smart. They are doing a lot of studies, they publish them, and they live very well from that. And in Netherlands, because they have a lot of fat, they use lipofilling. So, this is good and of course only on secondary they organize such kind of scientific events when we can learn what to do in reality with this. And we in Eastern Europe, you know, we are looking to the big brothers and try to learn from them and we are ready to do whatever they want if it's cheap, if

[10:13] it's available, and we can earn some money with. So, if everything is so unclear, so controversial, and so different, and everybody is convinced that his own method he's used to do is the best. And there is no doubt that every surgeon or doctor who's treating a Dupuytren wants to solve in the better way this disease. Then, how to decide? It's very very difficult. And I think that the most important thing is that we have to separate things. Because related to Dupuytren disease as related to all any other disease, there are three big problems, three big pools. One is beliefs, other is knowledge, and the third one is hope. And till now you have heard about my beliefs on my my data collection. And there are a few things I know exactly. I know that we really miss evidence-based data, but I know exactly that even if we

[11:14] have evidence-based data, we do not use that in the proper way. And then, of course, I know that we need to work a lot to make a lot of of studies, a lot of experiments in order to know better the disease. And then we have to speak a common language because that's a big problem in Dupuytren. We don't speak the same language. And as I used to say that FESSH and IFSSH official language is bad English. We should find a common language for Dupuytren disease, too. And of course, the most important, I think, that we organize these kind of congresses for our benefit and we discuss what we as surgeons we like. But we should ask sometimes our patients what they like. And this is why it's great this event because here not only surgeons are discussing, but patients are here and patients can tell their opinion about what they think about our treatments. And what I know is that the collagenase contributed

[12:15] enormously to our knowledge of Dupuytren. Not because collagen is so good, not because we should treat everybody with collagenase, but because with the development appearance of collagenase a lot of money was invested in courses and congresses and teaching all around the world where we are teaching not only how to use collagenase, but we are teaching about the etiology and diagnostics and treatment modalities of Dupuytren disease. And what I know is that FESSH and IFSSH has a lot of money if I regard from the point of view of my bank account because half million euros and 1 million US dollars a lot of money for me, but not for experimental surgery, not for research. And that money should be used in a proper way. And now times are changing and more and more the leadership of both two organizations are committed not to collect money and we agree on the fact that we are not a money making and money multiplying machine, but we should give that money

[13:15] for teaching. We should give that money for education, for research. And I know exactly that these kind of scientific events we are here, of course, first of all, due to the hard and strong work of the organizers, have a lot to improve our knowledge. And I know that the most important thing is how we decide. And I know that decision-making is a very serious problem. And decision-making can be rational or irrational. And we everyday face this. And if I you are looking on evidence-based data about how decision is done, especially medical decision-making how it's done, you will find a large number of articles. You will find books that describe how medical decision-making is done. And I don't know if you are aware that there is a journal which name is medical decision-making, and every year there is a congress on how medical decision-making is done. And if I want to tell you that the most important slide of my presentation is this. Where

[14:16] it's clearly demonstrated that evidence-based data is not everything. Evidence-based data is only one of the three pillars of our decision when we should take a right decision. Because another very important pillar is patient's values and expectations. And the third very important pillar is my individual clinical expertise. How my teacher taught me, how I used to do, how I'm convinced that I should heal my patients. And of course, now the third, these were the knowledge. And now the hope. I hope that the enormous effort of our organizing chairman and the committee will conclude in a great scientific event in these two days. And finally, I hope that one day a patient will take a pill and the Dupuytren's disease will be gone. And you may say it's a dream, and you may laugh, but it was exactly the case with the duodenal ulcer. When I started my surgical career, every day I was operating duodenal ulcers. Today, young surgeons have no idea what it is.

[15:17] Only because of a pill. But I I that if this disease will disappear for the benefit of our patients, hand surgery will be poorer with one of the most interesting chapters. And now, on behalf of FESSH and the IFSSH, I would like to thank the great job the organizers and polls they did, and I wish you a great learning experience here in Hernigou. Thank you very much.
