TITLE: Why Your "Organic" Honey Is Full Of Pesticides (w/ Eric Mason)
VIDEO ID: 1Fke1NV4ZdA
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Fke1NV4ZdA
UPLOAD DATE: 2025-05-20
DURATION: 99:55
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] The bees die, we die. Honey's pretty easy to fake. It's like farm rac, right? What's up, guys? Welcome to this episode of the podcast with Eric Mason. We're talking about bees today and honey. And we're not just talking about bees from the perspective of this cute little insect that you might have gotten stung by when you were a kid. We are talking about bees in agriculture. We are talking about bees in ecosystems. We are talking about bees and the future of our planet. One in every three bites of food we eat has been pollinated by a bee. But 70% of our agriculture crops are also pollinated by bees. My guest is Eric Mason. He is the executive director of Save the Bee. He's a total badass when it comes to missiondriven nonprofits and his work is very, very important. Save the Bee is a nonprofit aimed at helping people have awareness to how central bees are to ecosystems, agriculture, the future of our health as humans on this planet. Bees are dying. And as it turns out, the same thing that's killing the bees is the same thing that we're having as humans. Killing humans. So, we talk about all kinds of things in this podcast. We talk about glyphosate, pesticide contamination, herbicide

[01:00] contamination for honeys, how honey is made, why it's made. We talk about bees. We get into actual bee biology, which is cool. How much honey do you think one bee, one worker bee makes in its lifetime? Somewhere around a 12th of a teaspoon. That same bee in its lifetime that produced that 12th of a teaspoon of honey will pollinate thousands of flowers. We get into problems with contamination in honey, how to source your honey, what to know when you're looking for a honey, how to know or how to have a sense if your honey is real versus contaminated. A lot of honeys are not totally real. It's a very corrupt, contaminated market. What our seed manufacturers decided that they could do is that they could just coat the seeds beforehand. And the EPA actually regulates the spraying, but they don't regulate seed production. For a honey to be glyphosate free, it has to be in a bubble, right? The hive has to be at least five miles in every direction. We dive into all sorts of things. We talk about the future of the planet. We talk about how central bees are to our existence on the planet as humans. And so, if you are not eating honey, you've heard me talk about this on other

[02:01] podcasts. It's a healthy food for humans. It has all sorts of biological effects that are healthy for humans. People throw shade at me sometimes. They say honey is just sugar, but it is so biologically diverse. There are prebiotics, like you said. There's pollen, there's royal jelly, there propololis. So, you're going to learn all about bees, how they make the honey, why they make the honey, when it's contaminated, how to avoid that, and we'll give a message of hope at the end about how we move forward. But, I think raising awareness for bees, the production of honey in the right way is crucial for our survival as homo sapiens on this planet. 88% of the managed bees were in a 20 m by 120 m area of California pollinating the almond crop. This has been called a Super Bowl of pathogen sharing. Enjoy this episode with my friend Eric Mason. I'm so excited to learn more about bees in Costa Rica. I have Marola bees. That's what I heard. So, we're going to talk about all the species. Before the podcast, you just told me there are 20 different 20,000 different species of bees, which blows my mind. 20,000. But I have stingless bees at my house in Costa Rica, and I love the honey from them, but I want to get stinging bees. And I

[03:02] thought I was sophisticated saying, "Oh, I want to get apis mela." Is that what they're called? The species? Meera? Yeah. Meera? Yeah. And I I want to get those bees because but I didn't I thought those were the two main species of bees. I had no idea there were 19,9991 species of bees. But I've heard so I had a friend that told me that when she worked with bees, it was sort of this hive experience. It was like a greater consciousness. So we'll get to that in the podcast, but it's a very interesting thing for me and I'm all about honey. My audience knows I'm all about honey. Y and you are the executive director of Save the Bee, which is a nonprofit devoted to what? Saving the bee. Amazing. Saving the bee. And uh we are sort of in the in the midst of like many people do in their lives a sort of a recreation. So we've sort of operated as a small nonprofit for about 10 or 12 years. And and over the last um two years we've reformed our board. We've reformed our mission and we're we're really trying to take this effort to save the bee really out to a much larger audience. It's part of the reason I flew down here to talk to you because I wanted to build a relationship with you and I'm looking for great people who are

[04:02] aligned with what we're trying to do. We do three things essentially is we fund research and development or excuse me research on bee health. So we work with WSU and Oregon State University at the bee lab. Um we plant pollinator habitat largely in industrial crop areas to try to help make the bees healthier as they're migrating around the country now as as a matter of fact. And then we do awareness and education. So last week I was with 30 kids with a demo hive talking about bees. And of course, bees and honey always go together, but we really talk about the larger story. And this is really, I would say, the crux of our mission now, which is education and awareness. Bees are dying. And as it turns out, the same thing that's killing the bees is the same thing that sort of is the problem we're having as humans, killing humans. Yeah. Killing humans. And humans and bees are intimately linked. I think a lot of people listening to the podcast understand this, but lay this out for us because I I think a lot of people don't understand where

[05:03] their food comes from. You know, we go to the grocery store, we think, and I'm guilty of this. You know, you think like my food comes from the butcher, right? Right. It's not until the last few years of my life that I've understood that my food comes from a farm where there's a cow being grown or farm where they're growing, you know, bananas or hopefully in Costa Rica without pesticides or farmers in Costa Rica that I get my food from at at at a farmers market in Costa Rica. And I have bees on my property now, the stingless bees, so I see how they make the honey. Right. But like like help us understand why bees and humans are so intimately connected with our food supply. All right. So, it's it's an amazing question and it's the and it really is one of our main goals here because I feel like we've buried the lead. The lead is bees and honey. That's the thing we all talk about, right? This golden elixir from ancient times that humans love that's a full food. It's healthy for you. It's not sugar. It's sugar obviously, but sugar, but it's not pure sugar. No. And it's and it's it's a food. It's food. Yeah. It's not processed. Yeah. Hopefully not processed. Yes. Um, but we bury the lead

[06:04] because here's the truth about the bee and its intimate connection with who we are as humans and how we live. So, one in every three bites of food we eat has been pollinated by a bee. We'll talk about why that's great and why that's problematic later. And you know this from how it traces down into honey. But not only that, but 70% of our agriculture crops are also pollinated by bees. 70% 70%. And what about the 30% that are not pollinated by bees? Wheat. Okay. Not pollinated by bees. No. Wind when pollinated. That's a garbage. Grapes. Okay. Well, windpollinated. Well, wheat is garbage anyway. I think right. But but it's but but that and while that's true, let me let me just talk about the the the the 70% that is because it's it's fruits, nuts, berries. I mean, I know you're you eat fruit. Every single fruit you have. I mean, I always say that a bee carries on its wings or in its pollen pockets the next generation of food. It's wild to from one plant to the next. So the other piece of this is that alfalfa and clover

[07:06] alalfa and clover what our meat eats what our chickens eat is also pollinated by bees. So if bees bees people don't realize this bees are a keystone species. If you if you've traveled the world and you ever seen a a Roman arch or a Greek arch, there's a stone right in the middle that holds up the entire arch, right? The bees die. We die. Everything we die. We go. I mean, now we probably still live, but we wouldn't I mean, there's you can go online and find things like here's your produce section with bees and here it is without bees and like 60% of the stuff is gone. Your food's more expensive. I mean, our our whole food security system here in the United States, particularly since we've gotten into industrial food production is really determined on the honeybee in particular, but even throughout the I mean, the rest of the world now, it it's it's also sort of sort of starting to turn this way. But, um, you know, we're intimately connected to the bee. They are the canary in the coal mine for us and the the unhealth of bees sort of reflects the unhealth of our own particularly in the United States and increasingly in Europe and other places our industrial farming. But right but

[08:08] bees bees and we're like this we are like this with bees. There is a we are we I wouldn't say we're symbiotic but pretty darn close. And bees are symbiotic with what they do as as well. I mean, all of these plants that need to reproduce, to make fruit, to have their seeds carry somewhere else, and to keep growing, to be vibrant, and even even for even for uh crops that are not pollinated by bees to have a healthy ecosystem in that wheat field. Yeah. You need other things happening. You want rich soil, you need bees because that increases diversity of environment which increas which decreases water runoff and erosion. Ultimately that leads to cleaner water and that leads to cleaner air. I mean there's little that you could put in front of someone and say tell me how it doesn't how how a bee isn't affected either directly or indirectly by and how we aren't affected by the bee that was in part of that product. So bees are a keystone species. I mean this is the lesson we need to learn. They are intimate with intricate to how we're

[09:10] going to survive as a race and and really an early indicator of where we're at in terms of our own personal health and global health. So, take me through the life cycle of a bee because I don't really fully understand this either. There's there's a beehive and bees come out of it and they make honey. Yeah. And that's about all I know, but like how do how does this work and what is why why do bees make honey in the first place? Good call and a great great question. So, first of all, and I get this wrong all the time, a beehive is the house where the bees live. Uh-huh. A colony is the family that lives in there. Okay. I get this wrong all the time. I said it wrong at a thing the other day and people were like, "Um, it's a colony, not a hive. You were giving away colonies, not hives." And I was like, "I know. I get it wrong all the time." But, um, so sort of the basic life cycle of a bee is, uh, well, let's start with what a bee does on a daily basis. So, inside of a beehive, there is a worker bees. And everybody knows the worker bees. They see this is the thing that most people see, right? A hive consists of about 95 to sometimes 100% of the bees inside of a beehive

[10:12] outside of the single queen is a is a worker bee. Okay? Their job is to fly out of the hive. And just to give you a little insight here on how crazy bees are as collectors, every bee has 30,000 hairs on its body. Wow. Those those hairs are electrically they have a little bit of a positive charge. And when they fly onto a flower to collect pollen, they literally that pollen sort of almost jumps onto their hair. Electrostatic interaction. Yeah. Yep. And the bee and what, interestingly enough, the the flower then uh when the bee leaves actually momentarily has a negative char will will have a neutral charge and so other bees will know ah someone's just been there. Okay. So I can just pass that one by and keep keep it. They can see it. Yeah. They have five eyes so they can see this and they can they can sense it. They know, oh, a bee's been there. not going to go to that that particular bloom. So, we move on the next one. So, bees go out, they collect pollen. So, they're moving. So, bees, these worker bees from the hive are flying into flowers to basically collect pollen. Collect pen and and something else. And and just so and

[11:12] we'll break this down into nutritional terms. That's their protein. That's going to turn into the protein that they're going to feed the baby bees, the the larvae and the and the the brood, what we call the brood. That's all the bees that have been laid by the queen and now are are growing to adulthood to become more worker bees or perhaps a drone or maybe even a queen. So that's the protein. So pretty simple. Bees are going out to collect pollen. They're not doing it to make honey for you and me. They're doing it to keep their hive growing, keep the colony going. They get the protein from the flowers. Pollen is a protein, right? So then, so they're doing that. The other thing they're doing is while they're there, they're taking their proboscus, which is their tongue. Essentially, their tongue, which actually, again, another one of these crazy facts. It's actually not a tongue. It's actually It is a tongue. It comes out. It's like a big straw. But again, just to show their sort of natural efficiency. It It actually doesn't They don't suck it up like we would think of a straw. Their proboscus actually has also has hairs on it. And it if think of a think of a dish towel sitting down when you spill some milk and you put your paper paper towel down or something and you and it sort of

[12:14] conducts up the paper towel. That's how they're that's how their proboscus works. They go they put it down and they stick it into the flower and they pull that nectar out and the nectar is their carbohydrate. Okay. So you got you got proteins, you got carbohydrates, you got a food, right? So what they do is then they fly back to the colony. Uhhuh. And they well, we'll talk about how honey is made, but they basically make that into a a bee bread, which is pollen and honey mixed together, and that's what they're going to feed the the the larvae that's going to then eventually become a baby bee. And then and that bee will then spend about the first four weeks of its life inside of the hive working, taking care of others in the nest or in the in the colony. And then it'll spend the last two to three weeks of its life out flying around to get more pollen and more nectar. Interestingly enough, this is again back to this sort of we buried the lead around bees and honey. How much honey do you think one bee one worker bee makes in its lifetime? And

[13:15] they live about six to eight weeks in the summer. That's it. Uhhuh. There's a guess. One one bee I would bet 100 milliliters. How much is 100 milliliters? Maybe that's too much. So if you have a jar here like Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Let's let's talk about how much this jar is 510 milliliters, right? It's 510 grams of honey. So this is half a liter. So I'm going to do it in teaspoons. Okay. But a bee makes in its lifetime somewhere around a 12th of a teaspoon. One 12th. It's way less than I thought. Way less than you thought. A teaspoon is five grams, right? Okay. So I was way off. So a 12th of a teaspoon is like, you know, Yeah. See, this is why you're This is why you're the doctor. A fraction of a gram. A fraction of a gram. Okay. One bee makes a fraction of a gram of honey. So you think about this. Well, think about every time you take a spoonful of honey out, how many bees it took to make that? Yes. So this jar is 510 grams, right? There are essentially more than 100 teaspoons in this jar. Thousands of bees. Thousands and thousands of bees. Thousands of bees in their lifetime to make this single

[14:16] jar of honey. Yeah. That's wild. Crazy, right? Okay. So, but but here's your colony has 50,000 bees. healthy healthy bee colony can have 50,000 bees. But here's the here's the kicker though. This is again this is the this is the thing that people miss about bees. That same bee in its lifetime that produced that 12th of a teaspoon of honey will pollinate thousands of flowers, thousands of flowers. So thousands of apples and oranges and squash and potatoes, all of these ve fruits and vegetables that we eat and love. almonds, all of these things that we eat and love are actually we the bees have to do that work. I mean this is the real value. So when we eat that spoonful of honey I often talk about like sort of the voice of the bee and seeing the seeing the world through the lens of the bee. When you go to cook in your kitchen, I would feel terrible if the only time a person ever thought of a bee is when they're eating honey. they should be thinking about when they're eating their grass-fed beef because the

[15:17] grass-fed beef beef also has to have a vibrant ecosystem in which to feed and a bee is essential to that ecosystem. So, if you want to have healthy beef and healthy eggs, healthy chickens, you better have healthy bees. Yeah. Right. Or we're not going to get there. So, so, so bees have bees have now, so bees have gone out, they've they've collected their protein and their and their nectar and they've brought it back and they take what they what they're doing really is in a in a colony situation is that they're during this time of the year in particular, they're building up resources. The queen is laying up to 2,000 eggs a day. So, she's just cranking. It's less lot less in the winter. And what they're doing is they're like, "Hey, particularly in the in the north where I'm from where the season's three, four, five months long, not here so much, so hives don't oscillate so much." Um, the bees got a couple months and they know it. So, what they're doing is like, "Shit, man. We got to we got to get some honey going cuz come wintertime, we're not going to have any." So, what they do is then they start taking they start going out and getting all the nectar they can and they start storing it for the winter time.

[16:19] Okay? And they the way a bee makes honey essentially simplified down is they go out and collect the nectar. It's always got a little bit of pollen in it because they're mixing it together and making different stuff in the hive. The bee bread that they're feeding the babies, right? And what they do is they put this So bees have two stomachs. They have a digestive stomach and then they have a a essentially a crop, a honey stomach. Okay? And they that honey that nectar goes in there. when they come back to the hive, it they they transfer that into other bees. So, they actually sort of do a profit sharing deal where they transfer it in in this crop is where you get um you have enzymes in their crop that actually um purify the honey. Um and and actually there's there's a trace of hydrogen peroxide in there. Okay. And that's what actually is one of the one of the properties that makes honey not almost have an infinite shelf life. Okay. Interesting. So they they transfer this honey to each other four or five or six times. Then they take that nectar now that's been transferred back and

[17:21] forth. So they're sharing it between bees. Sharing it between bees. They bring back a a crop full and they basically put it into another bee that then puts it into their crop and then shares it with another bee. Why do they do that? Do we I don't know. I I wonder if they're doing that. It's part of their own process of of purification or mixing diversification between the I mean because you imagine that a crop I bet that a bee has a specific microbiome in their crop. And maybe my my hypothesis would be they're sharing it. So they're mixing the microbiome. They're just getting it more diverse. Who knows? Yeah. When they deem it's ready, I'm not going to get into the intelligence of bees, but when they deem it's ready, they they do have an incredible intelligence. Absolutely. Absolutely. So what you're saying is actually true. They they are mixing for a very good reason, right? I mean, it's much like when we'll talk about how a queen mates, but it's the same sort of thing. They're mixing the they're mixing diversity and in the process also getting this hydro hydrogen peroxide in there. And so then they they put it into a cell, you know, the the classic hexagon cell we thought of that they've made with wax, which is an excretion that they make from their body. It comes off in little flakes that they've built

[18:21] these cells where they'll both put the babies the the the brood and they'll put the honey. So they put the honey in there. Here's here's another amazing thing about bees. So they stick the honey into the cell, right? And then other bees come over and they fan their wings on that honey. It's not honey yet, actually. It's still nectar that's been passed between five or six bees. And they fan their wings 200 times a second. Okay. To reduce the um water in the honey. Okay. There's too much fluid in there. So, they don't like that. It's not going to be it's can't preserve if it's got too much water. This not only does that, but it increases the acidity. And when they determine it's ready, and I don't know how a bee determines that it's ready, but they do it perfectly every time, right? Because we just pull the we pull the the honeycomb out, right? Do our thing. And they and and then they cap it with a cap. They put a cap on it and now that is sealed and and we you know there's these apocryphal stories of you know honey being taken out of Egyptian tombs and still being edible. I don't think anybody actually ate it but but it's still but you could. Oh I would eat it. Are you kidding? Yeah, too. I'm sure

[19:22] somebody ate it. Yeah. I hope so. I I want to be the guy. Give me some 5,000y old Egyptian honey. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. I'm sure somebody ate it. So, do they put do they put the larvae in there with the honey or does the No, those are in a that's in a different set. So, when you look at a typical frame and and I I need to get a suit on you and we need to get into we need to get into the bees. That would be so much fun. So, if you look at a typical frame, I don't want to wear a suit and I'll tell you why later, but Well, that's okay. I will tell you a quick little story. I wasn't wearing a suit on Saturday morning. I was at a a thing we do called Bee Day. Uh-huh. And uh it's where we we take orders for backyard beekeepers and they we bring over a bunch of colonies and we sell them essentially out to these people. So each box has 3,000 bees in it. And so and I was put in charge of basically cutting all the boxes apart. And these boxes are really kind of fragile. So by the time they get to where they're going, the bees are there's actually just bees everywhere. They're they're they're getting out of the boxes. They're escape artists bees as you can imagine like many insects are. And I'm I'm glad that we had a day between this

[20:23] interview and then because I got I I I handled I I did the math and I handled about 500 to 600,000 bees that day. I got stung twice and but but on my ear and so my yesterday when I flew in my ear was absolutely just Yeah. Just completely blown up. Uhhuh. That was the only thing you got and I didn't have and I didn't have a a suit on. So I handled 500,000 bees. Didn't for two hours, three hours. didn't get one sting. And I handle my bees without a suit most of the time, but not all the time. There's times when you're going in to do some, you know, like you're moving a you know, you realize a colony needs to move to a new hive. Could be pretty disruptive. You see a lot of stuff on the internet where people do it without hi without suits and and I get it. And there's but there's times it's like, you know what, they're I'm going to piss them off today because I've got to do something for their goods, you know? So, it's like, all right, I I'll wear I'll wear the suit sometimes, but usually when you're in there just doing hive obser observations and in there checking stuff out, seeing what's going on, seeing if they're looking good. I hope my bees up all the time. And bees do recognize me. I mean, my three colonies, three hives

[21:26] in my backyard, they know they know me. You know, I can tell when they're agitated, you know, is what I've heard. This is why I want to get some of the some of these apis bees, but we'll get to that. Yeah. So, the bees, they go to the flowers, they drink carbohydrates like sugar water essentially. Well, sugar water plus plant chemicals from the flowers. Definitely not sugar water. They're fed sugar water by commercial beekeepers. Talk about that. Yeah, that's not the same. Yeah, but they're drinking a actor a nectar which is much more biologically complex than just sugar water and different from I mean you go to a maple tree that has nectar and you go to a tomato, right, bloom that has nectar. Those are different things. Absolutely. Yeah. This is why this is why honey has a teroir like wine because why you see you know an acacia honey a clover honey buckwheat honey a sage honey a manuka honey which we'll talk about yeah they're just different trees or flowers that the bees are pollinating and drawing the nectar from. That's why it becomes a named honey is my understanding. We try to do those here in the US much like organic. Mhm.

[22:27] It's harder for us, but in Europe that's a bigger deal where they where they put bees in places and keep them there for honey production and can do that a little easier. We we do label our honey with with different appellations and sort of, you know, single crop, but it's a little less effective here in the US just because of the nature of the beekeeping industry in the US. We'll we'll talk about what that looks like. Yeah, I want to talk about that. So, they're getting the they're getting the carbohydrates, they're getting the protein from the pollen, they're bringing it back to the hive. They make the bee bread, which you said is a mix of honey and pollen, and they feed that to the larvae. Y and then they're they're sharing and royal jelly, which is an excretion that the nurse bees give off. And they do that for the first three bees for every bee in the hive with the exception of when they're ready to produce a new queen. And they feed them that royal jelly the entire life cycle. And that they produce a queen. So, a queen doesn't produce a queen. A produces female larvae across the board. That's all she produces. So, all the worker bees in the hive are are females with the exception of the few drones

[23:28] that are produced. And they're they're a drone's only job uh is to mate with queens. Really, they do one job. They they don't they don't feed themselves, so they're fed by the the worker bees. They don't defend the hive. They they actually are a burden on the hive. And you'll see at the end of a of a bee season when the when the drone time is done, you'll actually see the worker bees drag the drones out and kill them. I mean, the females, the females drag the males out. Yeah. The worker bees are all females. So, it's it's basically just the worker bees. Yeah. The females will drag them out and be like, "We're done with you. You've done your work and now you're just draining resource. That's resource we're going to need for to make it through the winter." Yeah. And they and they abandoned essentially, but they can't care for themselves. You never see a drone on a flower because they don't do it. They don't have the they don't have they don't have the proboscus. They don't have the they can't do any of it. They're just they're big and most people have never seen a drone because they're in the hive. And when they do fly out, they fly out to mate with other queens and they have a drone mating area and they'll go up and congregate and a queen will fly out from a different hive and they'll smell her with their fermones

[24:30] and they'll mate and so they and then they die after they've made. So they either get pulled they either they either sit around and do nothing and try and then get killed uh or they or they mate and die. Mhm. So the drones life can be you know be a little disappointing or I mean they get to pass on their seed but you know then they die but most of them don't you know. So yeah but there's like a collective intelligence in bees. It's interesting. It's a bigger mind I think rather than the individual bee. But so that the drones will move out of the hive and potentially inseminate a different queen. Not just the queen. They they don't ever inciminate their own queen because she's already presumably been in she's already she's already for one she's already fertile when when they've been hatched and the drones have been hatched and queens go out and so a queen will leave. So let's say there's a new queen born. Let's say a hive is queenless and they knew they knew they were going. So again you talk about hive intelligence sort of game of thrones inside of a hive. What the what the worker bees will do if their queen is

[25:31] underproducing. So a queen can So I go back a second. A worker bee lives six weeks. Okay. During the summer time, a queen can live four or five years. Oh wow. But when she starts to become unproductive Uhhuh. or dies, the the hive will take six of those regular cells that would have produced a worker bee. They will build them a little bit bigger and they will so a little bit larger to accommodate a larger bee and they will feed them royal jelly the entire time and that will produce a new queen. the royal jelly. And the royal jelly is a secretion from the nurse bees. That's correct. And the nurse bees are different than the the worker bees. They're worker bees. They're just a different life cycle, different time in their life cycle. And doing a different job. So, they're not out getting pollen and all that stuff. They're taking care of the brood and they're in the hive. Um, the first be the first queen to emerge will do, she spends about three or four days to get her sort of body up and strong before she takes her mating flight. One or two. Um, but the first thing she does also is then she kills

[26:32] the other five queens that haven't hatched yet. Okay, this is Game of Thrones. Fullon Game of Thrones. So, and if two of them hatch at the same time, they fight to the death. Or if there's an unproductive queen that they're replacing that the hive says, "Hey, we we got sorry, we got to replace you. You're not doing the way you think." Then that new one will come out and they will fight to the death. Wow. Um, so one queen only in a hive. It's all you can ever have. So that queen will will take her mating flight. She'll fly out. She'll fly to a place that typically they say is 75 to 100 feet in the air up up. And that's why we've also never seen drone bees because they're way up in the sky. And they're typically along a tree or a building somewhere where the air is calm and the queen know I don't again I don't know how the queen knows where to go and I don't know where all the drones how the drones know how to go up there but this is where they go when they leave the house, right? They go to this spot and they congregate and they wait for a queen to fly by and then 10 to 15 of those drones will mate with that queen and that gives her enough genetic diversity for the next three to four to five years of her life. She stores the sperm essentially. Yeah. For her whole

[27:32] life and then comes back and starts laying eggs. So she only has to be inseminated once. That's right. But it's by 12 to 15 other bees and and those drones only mate with queens from other hives. And they know that. They know how to they they can tell, hey, that's that g from my hive. It's not going to happen. I'm going with this scal from this other hive down the street. They're mixing genetics. Yeah. Okay. Wow. Wild stuff. Yeah. Crazy. And then and then so when we are when you are collecting honey, you are pulling out a honeycomb, these hexagonally shaped wax cells that are full of the honey that has been fanned and and shared the nectar shared among the bees. And it's the right acidity. It's the right pH. It's the right viscosity. Yeah. How long does it take to make honey? Like when you pull honey out of a hive, how long does it take to to like how long has the beekeeper used to produce that honey? Yeah. So like from one season to the next. So if if a if a colony is starting, like how long has that honey been in in the cell? All right, guys. Just want to pause the podcast for one minute and tell you about our honey from Lineage. Obviously, we're talking about a lot of problems with honey in this podcast. And this is why I wanted to

[28:34] build lineage. And one of our keystone products is our honey. So all of the problems that we talk about with honey were things that I actively wanted to address with our lineage honey. So this honey is organic. It's glyphosate free. We test every batch of honey for 450 plus contaminants, metals, pesticides, etc. But in the creation of the honey, we also do not feed the bees any sugar like we talk about in this podcast. They're only fed on their own honey. And it's truly raw. So when the honey is collected, there's no solvents. There's no heat. It's really the best honey that I've ever been able to find. And I'm so happy to share it with you guys. You guys can see the color of this honey is different than anything else. And as we talk about in this podcast, all honeys have teroir. So I think you're going to taste it. So check out our lineage provisions raw, organic, unfiltered, glyphosatefree honey. It's something I'm very proud of and as we talked about on the podcast, I think honey is very healthy for humans. So check it out. I think that this is one small contribution that our company at Lineage is doing to helping people be more aware of honey and giving you guys a product that is truly unique. So check it out, lineageprovisions.com. So the the way it

[29:35] works in in in honeybee production in this country is that we have a thing called the Langstroth hive. That is this. You've seen the boxes, right? Typically on the bottom there's a thing called the brood box. And mostly what's in there is brood and honey together. So they you bees aren't stupid. They put the they put the the brood in there and they put some honey nearby so they can keep doing the feeding and doing all that kind of stuff. So we don't harvest that traditionally that because that has bees bee insects in it and honey around it. What we do here is once that brood box gets one or two thick, so the hive is thriving, there's a lot of bees out there doing their work, we will put a thing called a queen excludder on the ne on the top of one of the boxes. And then we'll put what we call a western, which is a sort of a a thinner box that has all the the combs in there, all the frames, 10 frames. And what ends up happening is the queen can't lay above that queen excludder. She can't get up there to lay more eggs. She probably would, but the hive is strong. It's got 50,000 bees in it. is doing great. But the what the worker bees will do is

[30:35] they're like, "Well, we're out of space here. Let's just go start using upstairs. We we'll store in the attic." So, they store in the attic. They'll do that over the course of a month or two or a couple weeks. I mean, they I mean, and and then when the seasons end, so in for us in the in the in the Pacific Northwest in in July, we'll go on and we'll pull off one or maybe two and sometimes three of those westerns and there can be 10, 20, 30 pounds of honey. And it's pure honey. There's no brood. There's no there's none of the other stuff. It's just pure nectar fanned into protein. I mean, they'll build out the comb and do all the stuff they do with the wax because again, they're they're thinking, "Hey, if she comes up here and we need to start laying, we have to have the whole ecosystem ready." But we're and we're basically relieving the bees of that extra honey. And then of course leaving enough so that they can overwinter because in the winter that does become their that's how they survive. They eat the honey. Yep. The bees eat the honey in the winter. Y So when I was in Tanzania, I was hunting. By the way, I've been there as well and been with the Hudzabi as well. Amazing. So I saw that I was like, "Oh, I got to talk to him about this." Yeah. Yeah, we will talk. So we were out hunting baboons and I've talked about this

[31:36] previously on many podcasts and we killed a baboon. Uh the Hodza killed a baboon and then they saw that a neighboring tribe had made a beehive. They had and they had made a beehive by like taking a log and like you know putting it in a tree and they were sort of like you know they saw it up in the tree like we're going to go steal that right because it's all every man for himself. And yeah, you know, the the pastoralist tribes that are near the Hadza are taking over their land and encroaching on their hunting lands. So they're like, "Oh, there's a there's a log in a tree. There's a there's bees in there. We're going to go eat that honey." And within two minutes, they had made a fire. They smoked the bees out. They did the fire like the original. Absolutely. Did the fire with a with a a rod, you know, and a bow drill. Yep. And and they've got a fire. They got a great video of that just I just still blows my mind to this day. Yeah. They're so I would die out here so fast. They have technology. Yeah. Right. And it's very interesting. And they smoke the bees out. They get the They don't have bee suits, right? They get the the log down. And before you know it, they've cracked it open. And we're eating bees. We're eating the hive, right? With the honey. And I'm eating

[32:36] the larvae. Yeah. And because it's all together, right? There's no segregation. So, I guess in this hive that was a natural hive, quote unquote, in a log. Yeah. There were there were bees and there were larvae and honey all kind of mixed together in the comb. And so, you were eating you were eating larvae and comb. Mhm. Yep. Right. The wax. And so honey sandwich basically a honey sandwich. I've had this happen to me twice with around bees and the the first time was in a night market in Indonesia or I'm walking through this night market and one of my buddies there was like hey check you should try this. You're going to love it. And he unwrapped this banana leaf and in the banana leaf was bee and honey bee brood and honey and like a comb. In like a comb and it's a delicacy there, right? And so I munched into that and thought this is great. Protein and sugar, right? I mean, protein and carbohydrate, but natural and great. It was great. Super fun. But then I had a So, I'm I'm a little bummed because I think your hunters were better than my hunters. So, my the the Hudza tribe I was with, we actually went giraffe hunting. Oh, wow. And we didn't get a

[33:36] giraffe. I mean, that was that's insane. Like, no. No. And we chased like three of them and it was like they were out with they were out with their poison tip bows doing and I was like if we get this thing and and and so the guy was with Douglas who's who lives there. He was like, "Well, it's a good in one way it's good that we, you know, that we it's good that we didn't get it because you you kind of have you're on a time frame. you have to go back in a couple days. And if we had gotten this this giraffe, it probably would have been you couldn't have left for a week cuz they're going to eat and they're going to feed and it's like a big deal that people would have come around. And so anyway, we were out hunting and basically doing a lot of walking through the bush and um similar thing. this. They didn't. We followed We followed some bees into a old gray old tree and one of the guys whips out an axe and cuts into it and the and again stingless bees. Got in there, pulled it out. That was the stingless bees. I saw both. These were stinging bees. The first one. Okay. These were stingless bees. Got in there, we ate and he kind of then they kind of shoved the this the wood back on where he had cut and split

[34:37] apart this rock and and we moved on. And it was super cool. And I was like, "Wow, honey." out here in the middle. And and we were in a pretty barren area. It was like pretty rough, but I was like, "Well, the bees are finding something to forage on out here." And that was kind of amazing to me. So, yeah, a great great experience. And yeah, again, honey throughout history is I mean, we've been we've been we've been getting the honey for years and and it's been part of our part of our civilization. Like you talk about domesticated dogs and domestic. We domesticate all these things, but we've been working with bees for a long time. Probably forever, right? I think hundreds of thousands of gatherers. Yeah. They've been hitting the bees for a long time. Oh, yeah. This is I mean, if you look at the Hodza specifically, you know, um Frank Marlo, who did his PhD in the Hodza, has published a study called, you know, uh tubers as a fallback food for the honey. And he surveyed them and said, "What are your favorite foods?" And both the men and the women honey was their single favorite food. For the men, meat was number two. And for the women, it was a three-way tie between meat, berries, and um Tell me it's not Tell me it's not

[35:38] that tuber that we baobabob the tubers were the last food we that's what we ended up eating cuz we didn't catch anything. We did not fall back. So you had you had you had something to eat. We dug up the and they were stripping it off and we were eating. I was like, "Okay, well I was digging. I was like, "Well, I guess if I can't if we're not going to kill anything, I guess I'm going to be digging." So it was me and the ladies out there just Yeah. The men the men did not want to dig with me. No, no, no. I was Yeah. Yeah. They loved it. They're just laughing. Look at this guy. No, I went I went and dug tubers with the women, too, because I wanted to see it. And the men were just sitting there watching. They didn't want to do it. They had no interest in eating tubers. You know, my sense when I was with the Hodza, I was there for about two weeks, was that look, they're going to eat meat. They're going to eat berries. They're going to eat honey. And if they can't get any of that, they have fallback foods. But never did I see them eat a eat a vegetable. Well, other than a tuber. They didn't eat leaves unless they were using it as medicine. I did see some of that, too. Some chewing on leaves. Yeah, they're not eating it. They didn't really They didn't eat salads. They didn't seek out vegetables. They didn't really want to eat the tubers. They certainly didn't eat baobob seeds ever when I was there. They like the baaobob fruit. I've heard occasionally they eat the baaobob seeds,

[36:38] but I think it's only when they're starving. So, this is just an aside that hunter gatherers that I've come in contact with and read about, the hodza or the the ikong or the kungan. Um, they they're kind of this they they do favor the the sweet foods and the meat and and the and I will say the one not not that far away are the Masai. Yeah. Who are more they they heard, but their big thing is milk. Yeah. We talked about uh you know when we were talking before we started just uh about kind of stuff we might talk about like why is honey why do we have this this sort of romance and this attraction to honey and I was thinking about the you know talking about the land of milk and honey and with and why that is in the like it's biblical it's like and then you take milk and honey then you everybody associates olive oil those are the three most adulterated substances on the planet and it's because they're intric they're in intimately involved with who we are as humans an oil you know a protein and a fat and a and a sugar, right? I mean, then it's milk and honey and olive oil. And so when I was with the Masai, it was all about the it was all about the milk, right? And so it was

[37:39] like getting this raw milk. They had the cows out there. And in fact, when I was there, we had to we had to go on a lion hunt because a lion had killed one of the cows. And you don't kill a Masai cow and think you're going to get away with it. It's like stealing somebody's Well, we're here in Miami, stealing somebody's, you know, Lamborghini or something. All right. It's like you're in big trouble if you take somebody's cow in in in uh in that part of the world. So anyway, uh yeah, just an interesting thing about how these there there are ingredients in our world that are tied to our humanity and our our life here on Earth and they've gotten a little out of balance and how we get them and how we fake them and how we put them into people's diet and say they're there. I was watching TV this morning, had it on in the background while I was getting ready, you know, Honey Nut Cheerios with real honey. and high fructose corn syrup and 50 other ingredients. Let's talk about that. But they're talking about honey. Yeah, they Well, I when I was growing up, Honey Nut Cheerios were were pretty high on I mean, that was one of my favorite That's an That's a institution.

[38:39] It's a horrible cereal because it's full of glyphosate and other pesticides in the oats. Does no one's got favors and the honey in there is got to be garbage. But there's a huge amount of honey that's fake today. Huge. Like, what percentage are we talking about? I don't think anyone actually knows and I don't think there's really any way to know because when you say fake honey, so let me give you an example. One of the one of my kids last week was sick and she had a my girlfriend whose kids they actually are but how I'm helping to raise. They gave her a honey throat lossenge. Okay. And it said made with real honey. So, I I believe there was real honey in there because on the on the seventh ingredient down, it said real organic honey. Okay, good job. The seven the five ingredients before it were not honey and they were just sugar products, some some fiber of some kind and a few other things. But the number one thing they were advertising was honey inside. So I would have called

[39:40] that a fake honey product because what it had was was let's call it 1 to 3% honey and then 97% everything else. So truth and advertising there's none. So again, there's also there's also adulterated honey that just has that that again there's there's a global trade problem with honey and this is why the true source certification has been such an important piece of the recent trajectory of honey because because so because so because so because so because so because so because so because so because so because so because so the United States only produces 30% of the honey we eat. Mhm. 70% is imported. 10 or 15 years ago there was a bunch of stuff where China was dumping honey into the US market. So the government stepped in to tax honey coming from China. China, China's the world's biggest honey producer. Also the world's biggest fake honey producer. Sketchy. Super sketch. So what the Chinese did at that time was they were um what do they call it? Re it's not reshoring. But they were basically sending their honey to Thailand, having it labeled as from Thailand and then sending it into the United States. No, this honey is not from Thailand. We don't have to pay the tariff. The other thing that was started happening is they started basically

[40:41] sending in honey that wasn't real honey. And there's a bit been a bunch of scandals around that. So comes in what is honey that's not real honey? mixed with sugar, high fructose corn syrup. Yeah. Or it's it's rice syrup or it's some kind of molasses based or some kind of flavor added to make it taste like honey. Honey can be adulterated pretty easily watered down. It's maybe 10% honey and the rest of it's a rice syrup. So, anything that's if you ever in the store and anything that says honey syrup, just assume that it's not honey. Okay? As soon as it says syrup, it's not honey. The other real issue here is that we don't know. Chances are if you you go to your local store and you see the honey in a jar, right? Honey in a bottle and it says pure raw honey and you look at the back and it says, "Hey, this honey is from Davis, California or Boston, Massachusetts." Chances are it's real honey. Okay? Because it would be easy to tell if it's not. I mean, someone could pull it off the shelf and say they could do the test and say, "How would you test it?" They well they they take it a lab they do a lab test and the the only real way and this is why True Source is so important is they they they don't just

[41:42] do point of origin testing which some companies that do ingredient honey do. They just do point of origin. So they they test it when it goes into the barrel but then no one tests it when it lands here in the US. Anything could have happened in between time and then they don't test it when it gets into product or when it gets gets sold to an ingredient maker who's making granola. Mhm. So, this is the real issue with with adulterated honey is we don't know how much of it's in the food system because no one's ever going to take a granola bar and say, "I'm going to test it because there's there's a little bit of honey there, but you're selling it as a honey, nut granola bar." So, this is the real challenge in the ingredient space and why honestly I believe it's important that when you buy products that you buy them with the true source label because at least you know the honey that's in there is real honey. Now, that doesn't mean also that they don't have other crap in their food, but at least means the honey that's in there is actual honey. I mean, if I go to the grocery store and I look at the plastic honey bear. Yeah. That's I mean, what I call the 900 lb bear in the room when I talk about the sort of like honey pollination challenge we have, it's like the it's the 900 lb honey bear in the room. That's what people think of when

[42:42] they think of honey or bees. A honey bear. Yeah. Honey bear. It's very good marketing, but it's in plastic. So, I would never buy it in plastic. But I'm thinking like, what are the chances this is real honey? What are the chances this is adulterated? I don't I've seen some studies that 30 to 70% of the honey on the shelf has some sort of contamination. Who knows? I I I don't think that I don't I wouldn't I wouldn't dispute that number because I don't know. But it does it wouldn't surprise me because of how easy it is to adulterate honey and to make things look like honey. Let me give you another example. And this is this is here in my own neighborhood. Right. So in the Pacific Northwest and and maybe we get a little bit into how industrial honey make work making honey beekeeping works. Yeah. And so there are times when you get into a dirt, the bees don't you're worried about your colony surviving over the winter or a colony is not as strong as it could be because there's not enough sugar and pollen in the area. So, what beekeepers will do and what I what I've even done when I first started beekeeping was I make a mixture of white cane sugar and water and I put it on top of the hive and the

[43:42] bees come up and they grab it and they suck it all down and they go down into the hive and they they get fed, but they also they also cap it. When you send honey off to the the place in in Germany where they do the real tests, they will be able to say that's not honey. There's no pollen in it. There's no nutrient in it. We can tell that that's not honey. It's sugar water that bees have processed. Exactly. So honey's pretty easy to fake if you just put I mean it's like it's like farm race salmon, right? Put some food into make it looks like honey. It came out of a beehive. What do you want, bro? Well, it's not honey. It's high fructose corn syrup put on top of a beehive. So the bees make capped honey. Well, it's not honey. And you can tell I can tell when I taste it. I'm like, "Well, this just tastes like sugar water. It doesn't have the same biodiversity. It doesn't have the chemicals. Doesn't have the taro, right? missing that thing that makes honey, right? It blew my mind to learn and and you can correct me if this figure is off that there are hundreds of chemicals in honey beyond, you know, because people people throw shade at me sometimes. They say honey is just sugar,

[44:44] right? And it does have fructose and it does have glucose, but it is so biologically diverse. There are prebiotics, like you said, there's pollen, there's royal jelly, there's propololis. I want to talk about all this in the honey trace amounts, but there's over 300 plus chemicals in there that that we can characterize, right? I mean, hundreds. Am I am I correct? Well, I don't know about the total number, but what I can tell you is I'm going to kind of give you the bad the bad news. I mean, maybe you're saying this is the bad news, but like a study just came out from a woman named Sarah Scott. She's a UK based bee researcher, entomologist. She just did research on legacy legacy cities. So, she's I think that she did this in Detroit and Ann Arbor. And what she did was she went in and started looking at bee colonies that are in urban environments that are feeding on the dandelions and the local plants and the local food. And what she's finding in the comb and the honey is trace amounts of lead and arsenic and all this stuff. So this is these are

[45:44] pieces of property that haven't been that haven't been industrialized or had human touching them for let's call it 25 years, but they've had a hundredyear history of humans being involved. and she's finding lead in the honey. So your statement of like there's hundreds of compounds in honey. Yes, if you look hard enough you'll find anything in honey because bees again they're not only a keystone species, they're also the canary in the coal mine. They're picking up whatever is out in our ecosystem. And so I mean and we can get into you know glyphosates and other thing and and that's that I mean a big one first of all and also honey is definitely a sugar. It can be a sugar. Yes, but it's twice as sweet as sugar. You can use less of it, therefore in your cooking, but it's all and I would agree with you. It's a food. It's a food. It's got a protein in there, right? It's got pollen in it. It's it's a it's a food. Well, it's interesting to me, and we can talk more about this at the end of the podcast if we have time, but I've done different videos about this and we can link to them in the show notes. If you look at the medical research with honey, right, it it actually improves the oral microbiome.

[46:46] It improves teeth health. It actually can improve, you know, candidasis in the mouth. It has antibiotics. People think people think if you eat more honey, you're going to get more cavities, but the research actually suggests the opposite, right? There's research suggesting that it improves glucose tolerance. I was going to say, doesn't it not spike your insulin as much? It it it's it's not so much about insulin because it does have sugars, so it's going to cause an insulin response, but it changes things probably at a metabolic level in your gut that improve insulin sensitivity. It looks like because in a in a head-to-head study, they took diabetics and they fed them an increasing amount of honey over eight weeks. I've seen the study. Yeah. At the end of eight weeks, they were eating I think 125 grams of honey a day. So 125 grams. It's like a lot of honey. That's a quarter of right. I eat more than that a day. You're you're still got rookie numbers. You got to get those numbers up, bro. But I ate it out of the I ate it out of the hive. Just Okay. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. So like a quarter of this jar, you know, that's what they're eating a day. And their blood sugar goes up some. I think it was an average of like seven milligrams per deciliter per day versus the non-honey group, maybe

[47:47] 10. but their insulin sensitivity improved. So yes, if you give a diabetic a food that contains a carbohydrate like sugar, their blood sugar will go up, but their insulin sensitivity, which is the real problem in diabetes, improves. And I'm not necessarily advocating for 125 grams of sugar, don't be drinking honey in a diabetic. But like look, the the goal in diabetes is to improve insulin resistance. And I think that in western medicine, we miss the mark. And we're mostly focused on treating blood sugars. often we're treating blood sugars at the detriment of insulin sensitivity because and this is an aside we'll get back to the bees and the honey when we give people sane uras when we give people insulin we are worsening insulin resistance so sane ura drugs essentially fogg the pancreas into producing more insulin by messing with the sodium potassium pump in the membrane they change the the the polarity they cause depolarization of these beta eyelet cells in the pancreas and you fogg the pancreas into creating more insulin you essentially exhaust the pancreas or you worsen insulin resistance with the main ways that we treat diabetes

[48:49] today. So, we're treating it all wrong and the from a medical standpoint. And what I would say, I'm going to dumb this down. I'm not the doctor. I'm an, you know, anthropologist more than anything else. Food is good. Not food is not good. Right. And so, from more Yeah. And and honey is a food. A highly refined sugar dumped into our products isn't food. I often say that it's like, look, we're not going to eat a product tonight. We're gonna eat a food. We're gonna eat foods. So, if you eat foods, you're going to have all the positive impacts that you're talking about outside of what how we're treating it. That and I believe that's why honey's great for you. It It's a food and the research shows that it's good for you. The research, again, simplified down, it's it's a food. It's a food that humans sugar. Sugar like that isn't a food, particularly when it's dumped in in those ways. And I think and I've tweeted about this and we can link to that in the show notes as I think the reason sugar is bad for us is not because it raises our blood sugar, but because it affects the microbiome negatively. And all of the chemicals, the compounds that are naturally occurring in the flowers that bees are

[49:49] getting this nectar from, those affect the microbiome in a positive way in humans. That's my hypothesis and I think there's evidence to support that. So, if you improve microbial diversity, if you improve microbial quote balance at a very high level, I think you can improve your metabolic health. probably how honey is improving things because one of the ways that processed sugar is harmful for humans um is that it increases dispiosis. So when you just feed humans pure sugar you get overgrowth of the wrong bacteria in the gut and those wrong bacteria produce lipopolysaccharide from the cell membranes. This is gram negative endotoxin right and that endotoxmia leads to mitochondrial dysfunction. This is one mechanism by which humans become insulin resistant. And so this honey appears to be able to help with that and that makes sense because honey contains so many compounds. It may help balance the microbiome and decrease this dispiosis. That's fascinating. But as you so incestingly point out, the honey has to be real. It can't. And it better be honey from a hive where the bees are

[50:49] getting the nectar from flowers and not just eating cheap sugar on top of the hive. That's crazy. So let me let me I So I was just having a conversation this week with Dr. Dewey Karen 13 books on bees, one of the leaders of on on bee research in the country, educator, and everything you just said about the human gut biome. Mhm. Bees have a gut biome as well, I'm sure. And it's actually being massively impacted by what he said. The research is showing this now um by the the the high fructose corn syrup that's fed to them. Wow. It's keeping So two things he said. Look, that's basically that there is the high fructose corn syrup is we're now finding is affecting their gut biome, making their gut less healthy, less able to um absorb the nutrients they need from the foraging they're doing. The other thing is this is the so quick aside on pesticides. I I I actually don't mind the word pesticides, but I think pesticides is in my mind a dandelion isn't a pest. So, I prefer to

[51:50] refer to them as herbicides. The glyphosate, right? This is something to kill weeds. Uhhuh. An insecticide, not a pesticide because pest I think is the wrong word. We we're in the wrong mentality there. A insecticide is something that kills insects. In many farms there's also a rodenticide, something that kills small animals. Sorry, and fungicides. So there's something that kills fungus. So we, you know, I prefer we just say, oh, that's the thing that kills insects. That's the thing that kills plants. That's the thing that kills small small animals. And that's the thing that kills fungus. So in the case of ne neonicoteninoids or neonics is what they call them. This is the this is the insecticide that's used prophylactically around the country in our industrial farming in the US. In the US it's sprayed. It's saturated. It's injected into crops to kill off certain insects that would harm a particular plant. It's becomes systemic in the

[52:53] plant and the bee picks it up in its pollen and in the nectar. What the research is showing is that it's what while it does have negative effects and and bees can overdose on it, they get disrupted, they they can die immediately or they can get disoriented to the point where they can't get back to the hive. It shortens their lifespan. Has a bunch of negative effects when it's overdosed. And of course then you know the literature is always like well the at the doses we're doing it it's not it's nonharmful even at those low doses we're finding it in the honey and we're finding it in the pollen it's in the wax which is where the babies are living and what they're finding is is that it's affecting the bees gut biome and making them less healthy. So what's affecting us is affecting them. So these these neonics are really pretty pretty like all over in our society now. In my hometown in Eugene, they've outlawed the neonics to be sprayed in

[53:53] our local parks. Awesome. Here's the real problem. You mean Okay, go ahead. They can't So they can't spray this stuff anymore in our local parks, right? They and it's it's against the law in Eugene to do it now in Eugene and other places in Eugene and Oregon. other there's other towns that have said, "Hey, we don't want that stuff being sprayed in our parks because we know it's not good. It's an insecticide. You know, it's going to hurt the bees. It's going to have all these effects. We don't want our kids around it." Right. Duh. Right. Right. What our seed manufacturers decided that they could do is that they could just coat the seeds beforehand. And the EPA actually regulates the spraying and the saturating of neonics, but they don't regulate seed production because seed production is a product. What happens when that seed goes in the ground? 90% of it, 80 to 90% of it goes into the soil. Same effect. The rest of it goes right up into the tree or plant and the bees are still getting it and the insects are still getting it and it's still in our system. And you talk about living in a toxic soup. Most of the most many many many many of

[54:55] the plants that you even buy at your local nursery have had a have have a have a coated seed so that it's more so it's more successful for you as the a backyard garden idea. So, what I would encourage people to do, I mean, if you ever want to be a beekeeper without getting the the beuit and all the tools, is when you go to your and and I think Lowe's and Home Depot have said they were going to get rid of these coated seeds, these neonit coded seeds, but I I I walk the I walk those stores like you walk the Whole Foods and the Costco looking at food and I'm looking at the labels. I don't see anything on there where they're advertising it that this is a bee friendly plant sometimes, but I don't. So I if if I could make a suggestion of which I would have many is when you go to if you're a backyard gardener and many people are they're growing stuff they're even they're putting ornamental plants ornamental plants also get coated seed coated ask where that seed came from and what it was coated in because you're literally putting a toxin into the ground not to mention it typically comes in a plastic container into the ground even before you do anything. And then it goes into the plant and then the bee comes and pollinates the plant and then the bee

[55:56] has and the bee is and the bee is suffering because it has less healthy of a gut biome. It's and it's and and much like the example that's been used for me a lot is much like DDT uh was supposed to not be bad for birds, didn't kill the birds, it's but it broke down into DDE and DD thinned the eggs and that was killing the birds. But everybody said DDT is safe for birds. Look, the birds are fine. Yeah, but the birds offspring aren't fine because they're dying in shell. So the what they're finding is is that the breakdown of these components of these neonics is finding its way into the gut biome and affecting the gut biome and keeping bees from absorbing all they need to. Now that in a perfect world if bees were absorbing a wildly diverse group of plants maybe that'd be okay. Problem is in our country well let me give you the example. In this last two months, 88% 88% of the managed bees, so we have about 2.7 to 2.5 to 2.7 million hives in

[56:57] the United States. 88% of them were in a 20 mile by 120 mile area of California pollinating the almond crop. This has been called by another doctor I won't mention a Super Bowl of pathogen sharing, disease sharing. Right? They bring them all together to feed on one crop, right? And almond, we have we we do 80% of the world's almonds, but we've industrialized our bee production. So, the bees literally bees are migratory workers. They get on a flatbed truck, they travel to California, they feed on a single crop. Now, there's groups trying to, including Save the Bee, they're trying to make sure there's other other things there for them to feed on, but they feed on a single crop. They get back on the truck and they drive around the country then to do the citrus crop, the blueberry crop, the apple orange crop, or the apple and and cherry crop. And so our bees end up moving from crop to crop to crop to crop. And they're basically eating on Okay, so I know you you hate McDonald's French fries, but essentially they're doing McDonald's French fries. Then they're cruising across the country and they're going, "Now we're having a Big Mac, so a different it's different now.

[57:58] And then we're going to go up here. We're going to have a shake. And then we're going to hop over here and have some chicken McNuggets. never going to go home just because they're getting junk at all these places. They're getting there's nothing wrong with pesticides. Well, they're they're getting the pesticides in all those places, but they're also only feeding on one thing, right? So, there's no biodiversity. A bee goes out and particularly the western honey bee. It's a it's a pollinator generalist. It's going to pollinate on a lot of different things, right? It's going to it has there are bees that just pollinate on single things, right? That there's a I mean, the the wood cutter bee is it's all about alpha alpha, right? It's alalfa is the way it releases its its pollen. Um the alphalfa bees they they don't produce honey, but that's how they're they just they're kind of crop specific. There's a squash bee in Central and South America that just really they come out early in the morning. Honey bees don't. Squash flowers bloom in the morning. Those bees are there to pollinate. So the point is bees are picking up pesticides from around the country at each different spot. But more importantly, so let's assume they've already got a compromised gut health and

[58:58] then we don't feed them well. Mhm. We either feed them on a single crop and then when we find that they're stressed out because traveling stress that they're they're they're not healthy. What do we feed them? We feed them high amount we we feed them sugar. So we don't here get better. I'm going to feed you more of what you not what you've had because they again they are pollinate on those things. In Oregon, commercial bee farmers on average, uh, their bees pollinate five different industrial crops a year. So, other words, they're not home. They're out. They're they're moving around. And it's this is really the thing that I think so around 2016, um, it was there was a big survey done and beekeepers in the United States stopped making the majority of their money from honey. Beekeepers today make their money from pollination services. Pollination services for our industrial agriculture system that is essentially does swaths and swaths of land where

[59:58] nothing from miles around is a single crop. That's that would be unhealthy for anyone and it's unhealthy for the bees as well. So this is again this is one of these issues that that that we have with the bees and why it's so important to like I know you're into regenerative agriculture and that what we're doing in the industrial farming space is isn't healthy for the environment. It's not healthy for the bees. It's not healthy for us and we got to figure out how to solve that. It's a huge problem. I don't know how to solve it actually. Just I'm trying to figure out how to save the bees. It's pretty big problem. Yeah. It's pretty big problem. And also I was it was interesting for me to learn that bees fly up to five miles from the hive. all of this moving bees around the country to pollinate industrial crop crops aside. Say I have bees in Georgia, right? And there's a lot of glyphosate in Georgia and you have there's a lot of it everywhere. There's a lot of it everywhere. So like, you know, to get a a truly and we were talking about neonic nicotenoid pepsicides, but I want to talk about glyphosate because that's gotten a lot of press recently, too, which is an herbicide, right? Another another pesticide, but again, another

[61:00] thing we're spraying to kill something off that we don't like, right? And it for for a honey to be glyphosate free, it has to be in a bubble, right? The the um the hive has to be at least 5 miles in every direction, a five mile radius from anywhere that glyphosate is sprayed. Yeah, that's wild. So you could have really good practices and I want to talk about what organic means in honey also. So presuming you have an organic honey and we'll clarify what that means in Pennsylvania. If that farm that has the quote organic honey is next to a farm a mile or two from a farm that's spraying glyphosate, an organic honey isn't isn't organic. Could contain glyphosate. Well, it can't be organic. What does the organic certification on a honey mean? Because it doesn't really mean that it's glyphosate free when they test. Yes, but you have to test it for the glyphosate after to make sure it's actually free. Right. Right. But they can, which is what you guys do with your honey. Yeah. And I want to talk about that. That's why I'm so proud of it. like the so for a honey can a honey be labeled organic and still contain glyphosate because my impression is that

[62:01] it can if the what is what does organic it certainly could yes what is the organic mean on a honey label that there's no pesticides used in the hive production or how does a honey get labeled organic so there needs to be a bubble just like you said and they and they also can't use anything in the hive that would be considered on on the so they can't use a herbicide they can't use a pesticide in and around the crops or in the hive. Okay? So, they've got to do it on their farm on in the in the five mile radius of let's just call it their forest where they're going. What if their farm doesn't have a five mile radius? Then then right there out a lot. I don't know. I don't know because I've also talked to beekeepers who say that some beekeepers will use insecticides in the hive because of mites or something like this. All right, one more pause of the podcast, guys. I want to tell you about our new collagen from Lineage. You guys may have heard me talk about this already. It is a truly nosetotail collagen. So most collagens may have beef collagen. That's just type one and

[63:02] type two collagen, but ours has trachea and scapula cartilage which has type two collagen as well. So we have type one, type two, and type three collagen. We also put powdered eggshell membrane in our collagen for hyaluronic acid and elastin which help with skin hydration and elasticity. We also use organic acerola berries for naturally occurring vitamin C. That's essential for collagen production and utilization. And we put in a little bit of sea salt for collagen absorption. So I truly believe our collagen is the best on the market. It is a no satell collagen. It is tested for contaminants. There's a COA that we can provide for you guys if you want. But check out our new no tail collagen from Lineage Provisions. I feel like this is best collagen on the market in the world and collagen is such a valuable thing that even vegans take collagen. So if you're not getting enough collagen, check it out. Lineage provisions.com. So they may treat the verouomites inside the hive early in the season, but what we know about bees, bees have a I mean the life cycle of a bee is really short. So they're turning over really fast what's happening in the hive. So you can actually treat for a verouomite. Um and I don't do this so

[64:03] much anymore because I I I don't like putting on a gas mask to take care of my bees. Yeah. Right. So there's there's other ways to take care of it. again improving ver veroamite is a think of having a crab sitting attached to your side sucking sucking you dry. Yeah. Not not a fun thing to think about. But it it als they also they also transfer pathogens. But one of the things that they but and the pathogens then kill them oftentimes because their gut biome and they're not strong and healthy as they can be. So weakened hives because of pesticides, insecticides, food. Then the so the veroamite is preying on a a system that's already sort of broken. Um so I I don't know for sure but my belief is probably that they could probably do veroamite. So what happens is as the bee as the bee colony starts to decline in the wintertime because they're getting fewer bees, less stuff to feed on. Um the verouomite population starts to grow and it'll get into the brood chamber. It'll get into those baby bees. So what'll happen is is that when the bees go to then hatch later in the winter or

[65:04] towards spring, what you'll have is is this mass of verouomites in the in the hive. So often times what a beekeeper will do is they'll treat for vero and there's a variety of ways to treat from from enzyatic sort of natural enzyatic waste to more chemical treated waste that will kill the the the veromite in the brood. And this basically they can do this once or twice and then then there's a six-month break. By the time that hive then sort of comes out and starts to grow again, the veroamites are essentially gone and the hive is then great for the next six months to go about its production. But it's this balancing act around the veroamite. There's another might now that might be threatening our bees. But um but in terms of general organic pesticide herbicides outside the hive, you need to guarantee that there's nothing happening in a at least a five mile radius really. or you can't, which is why there's so there's so little there's 90% of our hives are on the road. So there's absolutely no way to produce an organic hive. An organic there's very few ways to produce an organic honey in the

[66:05] United States. Now, as a as an I have I have a beautiful I live in a suburban area, but I have a beautiful backyard that grows fruits and vegetables all summer long for as long as we have summer in Oregon. My my my yard is pesticide free, insecticide free. I don't use the seeds that are coated. I do everything that I can try to do to make sure it's a perfect environment. I have watering stations for my bees, so I know they're getting good water cuz by the way, the glyphosates and the and the neonics can get into the water. Yeah, bees need to drink water. If I taking water out of the taps, fluoride in the water. I mean, it's like there's a whole bunch. I mean, the bees are again, they're like an oyster, right? They're they're not a bottom feeder, but they're they're taking everything through their system. And but I go to my local Home Depot. I was just there a couple days ago and the Roundup is stacked up to the ceiling. Crazy. It's stacked up to the ceiling, bro. So, I'm like, look, I've got my bees in a in a I've got a huge lot, but I'm still 20t away from a fence. And if the great guys on the one side or the great family this side or the lady that

[67:05] lives over the back fence decides she wants to hit some Roundup to kill off some of those weeds, my one, my bees could be dead in a week. Um, but two, my honey can get infected and even the stuff I'm pulling out that, you know, I give it away to all my neighbors, everybody loves. They're like, "It's our honey." And it's like, "Yeah, these bees have pollinated on your flowers and mine, so please be careful." But I can't like in Eugene, Eugene's basically a town about 5 miles wide, which means my bees could be literally on the other side of town. One thing though, I will say, at least in the middle of the summer, um, I don't think this is true because it kind of goes against the whole busy bee thing, but bees are essentially lazy, okay? If they've got lots of biodiversity, bee's not stupid. They're not gonna fly five miles away if they got what they need nearby. So, I try to make sure my backyard's blowing up. So, all my bees are in my backyard. And look, there are days when I walk out of my backyard and my backyard's bigger than this studio, a lot bigger. I can hear the bees. As soon as I step into the backyard, the backyard is just pulsating with with activity. And I'm like, great. At least I mean I've got three colonies so I know that there's a lot more bees than are in the backyard,

[68:07] but I know most of them are staying home because they're getting what they need. And again, they're flying off and doing their things. I can see them and people can see them around as well. But um finding and sourcing real food these days is harder than ever and you got to be more diligent than you've ever been. Even even I'm growing it myself and I and I can't always tell. It's dizzying. You know, I've done some content about olive oils and I think there's a lot of parallels here. So I did a real about olive oil and I said okay if you want to get an olive oil and olive oil is very similar to honey 50 to 70 what's that breast and everything yeah well 50 to 70% of olive oil is also contaminated or adulterated right yeah and so when I went to the grocery store and I said okay if you want to get a good olive oil it should be organic coldressed in a glass bottle that is opaque hopefully from a single source and right so when I go to the store and I'm looking at honeys and I thankfully don't buy honey in the grocery store anymore because I wanted to source something at lineage that was all these things, but I want a honey that's organic. I want it to be in glass and I want it to be raw, which I want to talk about. And then I want it to be glyphosate free. And I want it to

[69:08] be from a producer that's hopefully a single source that that I can know the producer and think, "Okay, you're not just packaging, right, honey made from sugar on top of the hive that's actually from flowers." It's very hard to know. I mean, even in the even in California, I'll go to Arowan. I have no idea how good Arowan's honey is. It's a California honey. You know, I there's so much it to other industrial farming areas. I can tell you it's not labeled organic. I have no But my honey is great. Yeah, you'd love my honey. I want to try it. However, I can't guarantee that it doesn't have any of the things you don't want in it. It's honey. It's coming right out of the hive. And I do I do nothing to them, right? Except let them live in a beautiful suburban area. But again, I don't know. Again, I don't know what's happening down the street. I don't know if they're getting water from, you know, a a little a little puddle in the middle of August when it's 95 degrees in Oregon and they're grabbing some and that person has just sprayed and they're bringing it back to the hive. You I can't tell you. Yeah, you can only I guess the best you can do is test it afterwards to at Yeah. And I'd rather have people growing, right, and doing stuff and being involved and active in their food than not. But again, what what I'm talking about is much

[70:09] different than going into the store and trying to buy something and having the trust that we've actually got a product that's is what it says. It's hard. Let's talk about that's why the work you're doing is so cool is like you're actually in there saying this isn't what it this is not what it says it is. Yeah. I it's interesting to kind of dig into that. Olive oil is not what it says it is. You know, honey is often not what it says it is. Let's talk about raw because some honey now says raw in the grocery store. What what is a producer saying when they say raw? So, you get you've you've done all the stuff with the bees. You go to these westerns, you called them. You go to these western hives. The western western. Yeah. When you go to collect the frame, how does that honey get into a jar and what is raw versus non- raw honey? Well, typically it's in the processing. So, frame comes out, it actually goes into a basically a centrifuge. Uh-huh. Spins it around real fast. Pulls off the pulls off the honey. Pulls off the comb. Maybe pulls off a little bit of the propololis if that's on the if that's on the frame as well. All that stuff gets slides down the side of a big

[71:10] processor and into a vat. Um, it's and at that point it's actually really raw. I mean, that's just like you and I eating the comb. That's that's the raw you're going to get, right? What happens after that is it starts to get processed. So, it goes through varieties of strainers to strain out bee parts because there'll be some bees in there. I like bee legs in my honey, but I don't think most people some bee parts insect parts. There'll be pollen. Yeah. There'll be some wax. Again, all these things are there's there's biomarkers for bad stuff and all these things, right? And um I mean, if it's not certified as organic or you know where it's coming from. So all so a raw honey's got all the more of the food in it and then they heat it. They strain it and then they heat it. And those are really the things that that make that make it go from a raw to a not raw. Why do they heat it? Is it part of the like pasteurization with milk? I mean they're they're heating it to reduce some of the fluid to make it so it doesn't crystallize as much um make it look better on the shelf, make it transport

[72:12] better. You know, they're heating it up to really high heats. A lot of honeys are in the transferring are heated in the in the jarring process. Yeah. So a raw honey is pure honey can be pure but it can be not raw. So and raw is a big thing right now and that means it's minim minimally processed I think is the way to look think of it. And minimally processed is I mean think of a I mean you don't need a lot of wheat but think of a stone ground piece of wheat where you get the whole husk you get the I mean brown rice versus white rice right it's it's or a wild rice versus a white rice it's minimally processed to make sure you're getting as much of the food right that you know as close to you and I eating off of the comb as you can from that thing without actually giving you the combed honey which you can buy as well right and that's probably the rawest of raw although Sometimes that can even be heated if you wanted to, but they'd melt it, so they can't heat it that high. So the the comb honey is pretty straight up. Yeah. I would love to get a comb honey if I knew the producer was good. One of the things I've heard about comb honey is if it's not good that some of the pesticides or heavy metals can concentrate in the wax and you may not

[73:13] just like in our fat, right? It concentrate. That is that is absolutely true. One of the things that's been really brought to my attention of late is like look, it's they they they're putting the they're they're laying their their offspring into a into this wax that's got all kinds of crap in it and we wonder why they're not coming out healthier and B MB colonies are suffering, right? Um, and you know, there's a lot of lot in the news now around why bees are suffering and and again I we've talked mostly about two, but they talk about disease and and might and and and disease and and and mites and other things and they talk about global warming, but much of what I'm seeing is if we really just concentrated on pesticides and diet and and and the bees. Yeah. And the and this third thing of like our industrial food system ships our bees around the country. That's crazy. Moving around is is is hard for bees and it's hard for them on a variety of levels. They're exposed to more

[74:15] pathogens. They're exposed to poorer food, less diverse food. And then they're showing up and we're wondering why the pathogens and the disease and the global warming is affecting them. Well, it's because we're putting them into this precarious situation. Because I mean, here's the interesting thing. We had 6 million beehives in the United States at the end of World War II. Today, we've got 2.5, 2.7. Wow. It's gone down a lot. It's gone down a lot. So, we've got fewer bees doing more work. We're producing more food, right? But we've we started I mean, I'd be interested to you like talk about at some point like the food industry from World War II on because that's really when we started doing industrial food systems. That's when that's when fertil like our pesticides, our herbicides and our pesticides and insecttoides really started to take off. 70s, 80s, 90s. I mean, and and people like, "Well, you seem pretty you seem pretty pessimistic about the about about the future." I'm like, "Actually, I'm very hopeful about the future." I want to acknowledge that the way we've treated our environment is going to have consequences, and we don't like talking about consequences in the United States these day these days. But the bees are suffering the consequences of the things we've built. our, you

[75:17] know, our obesity rates in this country, again, just like the bees, not healthy, are tied to the consequences of the food systems we've built. And, you know, I often say, save the bee, save the planet. And the same thing that's ailing the bees is the same thing that's ailing us. Well, like you said, they're a canary in the coal mine. I think it is an indication, and we don't think about it much, but the neonicoteni neonicotenoids was the first sort of indication that I had heard in the last few years saying, "Oh, this is calling causing colony collapse." Yep. Or are a contributor to colony. Certainly a contributor. But I think that most of us think about bees, myself included until very recently, as something we were afraid of as children. And oh, there's a bee that makes honey and I get a bear in the grocery store. But they are, like I said, they're really telling us that we are doing some things very incorrectly in our industrial food system in the US and in other parts of the world. The ray of hope here for me is that there there are bees being raised better in other parts of the world. We've talked a lot about the US and I think that in the US we

[76:17] have it was it blew my mind when you told me that so many of the bees were used for this almond production in California. I'm convinced almond basically all of them. They're almonds are horrible. I I think almonds are not good for the human gut. They they're they're really hard to digest. That's that's separate subject for a different podcast. They use a huge amount of water. People who want their almond milk latte, they're not going to be happy with Well, I mean look, they should be drinking raw milk from cows anyway, which grass and alalfa which are pollinated by bees. Like I I think I am very strongly of the position that that our country would be better off. Uh economically it would change a lot of almond farmers life livelihoods but our country would be much healthier without the almonds in California. We you said we produce so many of the almonds for the world% of the world% and I think they're a crop that just creates a lot of problems for us. Water water issues and now be issues. Well I mean the bee issues all along but water water and bees they're connected too. So yeah but yeah it's a bad thing. And so, but it's interesting because lineage, we sourced our honey from the Yucatan, which is interesting because in the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico, I guess we were able to find in the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico, we were able to find regions

[77:18] where there there were not a ton of pesticides sprayed around. And so, Right. So, anyway, I have gifts for you. There's like wild jungles. Yeah. Places where you can actually there's like I've been to apiaries. Now, these are these are apiaries that are that are bees that are traveling. But you should see some of the apiaries where these where these beekeepers keep their bees in the offseason. Beautiful forests with nothing for miles around and they overwinter there in those places like man, let's just plant some pollinator habitat here. Let's just repopulate what's happening. Let's make sure the farm down the road that's the one farm close by is diverse and and get them to sign something that says we're not doing anything. let's just keep let's keep a hundred of these hives here and let's just produce some great but there are places to do it but it's harder and harder in the US where I think it's easier and some places that still have the opportunity to let there I mean maybe we should take our national parks and say let's start let's do bee let's do bee production in our national parks absolutely we've got great swats of land that owned by the government that you can't put anything else on let's put bees in those places and let them produce an amazing healthy honey in our own country yeah it's interesting that

[78:20] bees are so intimately linked to farming and so much of the farm farming that we do in the US is industrialized or pesticide laden with glyphosate and other pesticides. And so it's just this sort of kind of sinister, you know, collusion and the bees we built it. Yeah, we've built it and the bees are needed to do this pollination. You said they're moving around to pollinate all these crops, but they're not always moving around to pollinate crops that are organic and they're getting exposed to things. It's not good. Actually, actually say pretty rarely, yeah, are they going around to pollinate crops that are organic. organics become a thing, but I'm not convinced that an organic crop has an organic farm next to it or that it's I don't know. It's hard, which is why which is why you have to test the honey after you get it for for contaminants and so you know it, right? I want to talk about a few things before we wrap up because we've mentioned these things and they're interesting to me. Bruce Lee was a huge fan of royal jelly. I love Bruce Lee. You're not going to break some boards, are you? I want to. Let's go. We're going to break some boards on this spot right here on this table. I'm just gonna like the podcast studio won't be happy. Um, so

[79:22] like I was doing a little bit of like AI research on claw before the podcast. How do you get how could how do people even get royal jelly and propololis and be pollen? Are these things in your opinion? Have you seen any research? Are you interested in these things? Do you eat these things? Should we be interested in in consuming these things in addition to honey? Should we make a lineage royal jelly? Should we make maybe we should make a I'm interested in researching that with you. However, and I do know people who've done royal jelly and I do know people who do bee pollen. I used to eat bee pollin flax a flax seed brewer yeast shake that I used to make back in the day. Okay. I but this is the thing I used to do. I put leetin in there and I used to do this whole thing back when I was eating. Look, I went to the Olympic training center when I was 16 years old as part of a development program. I never got even close to being in the Olympics for in track and field. Was a distance runner. Okay. And uh we got done with the nutritional program that morning. been out on a 10-mi run. Dave Wadd, I'm old, right? So Dave Wadd was the one of the guest coaches, but the nutritionist said, "We're about ready to walk into the cafeteria of and this this guided my food journey for a long time." We were

[80:24] like, "Well, what should we eat when we go in there?" Like, "We're about to go into this cafeteria that has anything we could want to eat." And he said, "If the furnace is hot enough, anything will burn." I remember that. And bro, that's it. It's true. It's just wrong. Yeah. Right. It's like, yeah, that's good. But I but basically I ate I mean if I knew what I knew I did triathlons professionally for six years and the amount of carbohydrates that went into my system I mean you and I have a not a dissimilar past and that I had some eczema issues and I'm pretty much convinced it was because all I ate was carbohydrates 100% of the day and I was just jacking my system up. So I I and again I'm on a food journey as well. I think that royal jelly, bee pollen, I think those things all have a nutritional component to play. I think for most people, you know, guys like me living in suburban America who's who's taking care of kids, if you can just get them to get into good honey, into good food and be eating food, I think that's the goal. I think there are I think there are um ways to uh take it up a notch. And I think royal jelly certainly

[81:24] could be. I mean, bees produce an amazing product. I mean, think of this. Royal jelly fed to a regular bee turns it into a queen, right? I mean, that's some pretty powerful stuff. That's mother's milk, man. I mean that's and that's coming from the bees. It's not coming from the queen. The queen doesn't make a queen. The the beehive makes a queen. So they How do you collect royal jelly? I have no idea. You don't get it out of your hives. I mean I No, it's No, the bees use it. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know how they get this. I got to do more research. So like basically but I guess it's interesting to me that it's it's a it's a it's a secretion from the bee that's that's got greater amounts of nutrients, sugar, and protein in it. And again, every bee gets it to start its life. only the queens get it when they're making a queen get it the entire way through. So the first couple days they get it because that's their it's their kickstart, right? So yes, it's it has super amounts of all of the good stuff. It almost sounds like bee colostrum in some ways. Yeah, maybe. Yeah, I don't know if that's an accurate analogy, but interesting. I'll have to research how they actually collect it, but I would imagine that a a raw unfiltered honey is

[82:26] going to have trace amounts of propololis. Yep. Royal jelly and bee pollen in it. 100%. And what is propololis? So, propulolis is a resin that they pick up off of plants and trees and they mix that with honey and pollen, strangely enough, to basically seal holes in their hive and to to bind the hive together. Now, I have a didn't bring one, but I have a a beekeeper's tool, which is, you know, hive tool that's a looks like a tiny crowbar with a couple of different different contraptions on it that allow you to work inside of the hive, but we have to pry the beehives. Even after a day, the bees will have used propololis to bind the hive together and to create and sometimes to create defenses for the hive. And so propololis is an essential part of bees building of a colony's building of the hive and keeping it together. So that's what that's is. But again, they're also sadly enough, they're collecting it off of plants that we know the plants are manifesting the things that are in the soil now and not just sprayed on the soil. So um yeah, but that's what propololis is. So it's another thing that bees produce. I mean, think about it. Bees are the only insect

[83:28] on the planet that produces a food that we eat, right? At at scale, I guess. So, I mean, like they produce something that we I mean, you could use silkworms as an idea of as a plant that, you know, an insect that does something that we use, but they at scale the bees produce something that's pretty magical and pretty miraculous. I mean, I I just I watch bees and I think there's they're a miracle, man. I mean, the things they do and the way they are, we haven't talked a lot about the other 20,000 varieties, but there's bees that specialize in blueberry pollin pollination and I I mentioned um alalfa earlier, but and some others, but they're just, you know, there's there's an, you know, Dewey Karen who's written 13 books on bees. And every beekeeper I've ever talked to, every scientist and researcher I've ever talked to is like, you open up the bee world and you'll never stop learning. It's fascinating. They they will teach you something new every day. What is it like working with your bees? I mean, this is more of a personal question because like I said at the beginning of the podcast, this is why I want to get bees that sting. Yeah. Does it I I was

[84:28] told that it felt transcendental in some way, right? There's a a broader So, do you do you you said the bees recognize you? There's a do you are you able This is going to sound like a cheesy question. Are you able to connect with like a bigger consciousness like this hive mind when you're working with the bees? What does it feel like? So, like everything in life, uh, I think there's highs and lows to be keeping. I think there's moments where you're like, shoot, I'm frustrated. I can't find the queen. I'm trying to find out if this is a viable hive. There's something wrong. I'm trying to tend and monitor them. It's like, maybe it's like child rearing or or any kind of discipline that we do. It's a discipline, but there's moments when you get into your discipline, you're like, damn, this is good right here. I I'm feeling I'm feeling good about what I'm learning here. And bees bees certainly have that capacity. Um, I have seen some research that the octave of the beehive, so the the sound that's coming off of a beehive can have uh therap serious therapeutic help to Wow. to bipolar and or people who are having mental interesting issues. So the sound of the and I and I've I've experienced

[85:30] this myself with working with the bees that there is something resonant particularly when you're in them and they are around you and you're cool and they're cool because they'll pick up if you're not. So there can be a reflection of us like so many things. And if I'm coming in cool, they're coming in cool. Well, now I've had moments where I've been out doing a class and I have to get the frame back into the hive and it's sunset and if it's been a long day and I'm moving a little too fast and the bees don't like it and you can feel it and I can feel it. So, I I think the bees can can give us a sense of who we are, but I also think they're an amazing reflection of who we are. And so, I I think you're absolutely right. I think there is a zen around the bees but I think that zen you know starts from within and then we bring it to the bees and the bees bees can bring it to us as well but they are they are there we have we steward you know particularly in the case of western honey bees we steward bees you know they you know they are a a they are a part of our ecosystem that

[86:30] we've stewarded and husbanded and worked with and I I hear people say that we raise bees and I would say we manage them. I mean, I don't think that bees are they sometimes talk about bees as domesticated bees. My bees aren't domesticated. A cow will never attack me. Yeah, a bee will. Um, a bee can a bee can be a wild call a bee in a moment. So, um, I don't make this distinction between a wild bee, although wild bees are amazing as well and live very differently than domestic, excuse me, than the western honeybee, but bees are they they are they have a connection to the to the ground and the earth and the air and the water that we could use a little more of. Well, of course. I mean, they're they're more wild than we are, for sure. I mean, I've heard people joke that, you know, we're homo sapiens sapiens, but we're actually homo sapiens domesticated. You know, yeah, domestic us. Yeah. I would I wouldn't disagree. And this is the I mean, I've been I've been in Miami for a little bit right now hanging out. And I only when I'm in Miami, I only want to be by the ocean because I need some wild. And I think that humans in general need more wild. And this sounds trit to say, but I think

[87:31] most of us can understand that like having these wild things in our lives is very important. Yeah. And the bees are way to do it. Yeah. They're they're definitely an interesting connection. What is a killer bee? It's an Africanized bee. Uh well, they they are Africanized bees. There's actually there was actually an outbreak here just a few years ago in in Florida. Um, and I think they had it all eradicated. But yeah, it's a it's a it's one of the species of bees that um kill other bees. Mhm. Uh, and flay them up in some way in some places like um like a butcher. They'll take their head off, they'll take their their thorax off, and they'll take the body back to their hive. Now, I will say that some of the the killer bees get a bad reputation online, particularly on Instagram and other places that I follow from killer hornets, which also attack beehives, and they do that here in the United States as well. Yellow jackets and hornets, they're carnivores. So, bees, bees in general across the board are not carnivores. Like my this is one of the reasons bees are so docile is they don't care about you and me. They don't they don't want to take a bite out of my hot dog at my picnic or me. They

[88:33] are there for the honey and the pollen and we don't provide them either one of them. So, um, killer bees are, you know, they they they are out there. I I I've got a buddy in in Arizona who is like, "Yeah, you can go out in the desert and see see them and you can tell they're up there and they're they're buzzing around and they look threatening." Um, but they Yeah, they're they're a But, you know, the western honeybee didn't show up here. It's it's not indigenous to the United States. It was brought over here by the Europeans and it moved. In fact, um the Native Americans used to call it the white man's fly because it was when it was brought over by the original colonists um and started and initially their big thing was wax. They used it for basic because they you know they were using it to light their make wax candles so they could light and do other things with wax. But what happened to the bees is they quickly got away and started to move west before the before the settlers came over and the Native Americans would know that the white man was on his way when the when the western honeybee would start showing up. So, their nickname for it was the white man's fly. Interesting. Yeah. Interesting story. And um Yeah. Little

[89:34] just a little bit of history. Yeah. Cuz in Costa Rica, when I'm trying to get my bees there, a lot of the farmers are telling me that there's Africanized bees there. I think that's true. And they often get the hives often get taken over by Africanized bees, right? And I don't It's difficult, I think, to keep your bees from becoming Africanized and becoming killer bees or something. And I know the killer bees, quote unquote, well, they'll kill your hive. Yeah. They won't become them. They'll just kill them. Oh, man. Okay. Well, so you don't have to worry about that and you'll know. They're a bigger bee. They're a more aggressive bee. You'd know. I mean, I think I saw you walk by your bees at one point and you're like, I don't think you'd be walking by them if they were killing. No, they're just Maras right now. I don't have any of the sting the stinging bees. Yeah, I don't know a lot about protecting because they're not up in the Pacific Northwest and I don't and I don't think I don't and I don't think that they're a yet a huge issue here in the US. I know that was a big scare. The killer bees are coming. Our local bee populations are going to be suffering. Frankly, that's like being afraid of Freddy Krueger when really, you know, getting onto the freeway is what you really should be afraid afraid of, right? True. I mean, it's like there's so many things threatening our bees

[90:35] right now. And again, it's the same stuff that's threatening us. So, I'm not worried about someone breaking into my house. I'm worried about what I'm feeding the kids for dinner. Fair, right? So, um, as a general rule, yeah, what's the path forward here? How do we how do we save the bee? you know, how do we how do we create an environment that's more regenerative for bee farming beekeeping? So, there's a lot of people doing research. Mhm. There's a lot of people um planting pollinator habitat. We do both of those things as well. But what we've really come to at Save the Bee, particularly over the last six or nine months and some of the stuff that we're getting ready to launch, is we believe the only way to do this, much like you with your, you know, you're on a mission to help people be healthier through the way they eat, is that we need to leverage an army of people that don't typically think of bees and pollination, bees, bees as a keystone species. And we talk about sort of save the bee becoming with a with an army of other people, the voice of the bee and to think like a bee. And so I think there's we've just launched a program

[91:36] called save the bee beekeepers. And our sort of our tagline is you don't need a white suit to be a beekeeper. Okay. And it's just finding building an awareness from people like they've done with organics or sustainability or looking for the the the better product in the store is walking into their store, walking into their life, walking into their backyard and thinking through the lens of the bee. So, our goal is to bring people on and just, you know, to be able to say, "I am a beekeeper." Well, you're a beekeeper. You're not a beekeeper. You don't have a white suit. You don't have a hive in your backyard or a colony in your backyard. Well, guess what? I don't need to have that thing to care for bees like the bees small a little small action can have huge effects. So, the way we shop, planting um a watering station for bees in our backyard, perfect example, going to I mentioned it earlier, going to your local nursery and saying, "What are the ornamental plants, the vegetables, the things that I'm picking up in the seeds or in the little starter packs, what have they been coated in before I'm going to go put them into my yard and potentially not kill the bees hive that

[92:37] I have in the backyard because most people don't, but it may kill off the three or 400 varieties of bees that we have just in the Pacific Northwest that and most bees Let's be honest, don't aren't aren't aren't western honey bees. Most of the bees are wild bees that live in small solitary or small hives. They don't produce honey. They go about their business. They live on the ground. I mean, I often say to people in the Pacific Northwest, just don't rake your leaves in the fall and the spring because there's bees living down there. Oh, right. There's bees that live in the ground. So, just do little things that, you know, let your weeds grow. Like, I I I feel like that in most gardens, people see a a piece of a basil plant bolt. So, bolting means blooming, right? And they immediately cut it. They see their uh cilantro start to bloom and become coriander and they immediately cut it down. Well, guess what? That's beef food, right? Right. You're cutting out I mean, so you've gotten the bee, you've gotten the basil, you're happy, but then soon as it starts to have a flower, you cut it off so you can get more basil that you'll never use and the bee suffers. So, I think I think this takes

[93:38] a movement. And I that's, you know, part of the reason I'm here to talk to you because you're interested in making people healthier. I I feel like there's there's really no difference between what you're trying to do and what I'm trying to do, which is I'm trying to save the bee because I believe saving the bee makes my children healthier. I think it helps allows me to slow down and be more peaceful. I think it allows me to think clearer. I think it allows me to be better, stronger, faster, you know, and so I again I don't I think there's a lot of people talking to beekeepers and I think there's a lot of people talking about industrial indust systems, but I think there's a huge swath right in the middle and it's the everyday person who doesn't go into a they walk into a store, they walked down that one aisle was in the healthy market down here the other night and I walked down the one aisle. Of course, I went to see the honey aisle cuz I want to see what they were carrying, but I also walked down the produce aisle and I walked down the deli aisle and I walked down the salad dressing aisle and the and the egg aisle and all these other places where these are just as involved. Yeah. And so that's that's the that's the thing we're trying to do is just if you know and in you you you know if I could wake up in

[94:40] 2035 and and there was a there was a save the bee label on products and services that we knew were taken into account the the bee you know like a 1% for the planet or an organic certification or whatever the thing is that allows us to mainstream the bee and be that voice and it's not it's not save the bee it's the people who will come on and help us do that work. Um, that's the thing that I think we're missing because the bee is the bee's been misrepresented to just be a honey dude, you know, or honey gal. Excuse me. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I think we need awareness. And I mean, maybe in this next four years we'll get some awareness at the level of the EPA. I think I hope so. I hope so. You know, and I mean there's there's new people in all of these government agencies now, you know, FDA, HHS, and I think that there's probably room for conversations around what these neonic pesticides are doing to bees and and the way that bees are being raised that hopefully will happen. And I think that it's like you said, it's it's a canary in the coal mine. It's a clarion called if if the bee health declines, we're going to suffer as humans. And so we already are. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. So I think the first step is

[95:40] doing podcasts like this. Thank you for coming on. My pleasure. Getting people into the awareness perspective of saying like, okay, what is honey? What are better honeys? What are worse honeys? How do I support these things with my dollars? How do I talk about these things? How do I think about my own little 1% of everything, right? My backyard and my neighbors backyards and my neighborhoods. cuz you were saying, you know, in Eugene there's no neonic pesticides allowed in the parks, but I'm thinking like what I don't know what happens in Miami and I'm, you know, I drive by golf courses in Miami and I'm thinking, oh man, what environmental disasters? Yeah. Yeah. That's a general rule. What pesticides are on that's not an ecosystem. You know, what pesticides are on there? What are on your shoes? So, I think that there's just it begins here with an awareness that hopefully then begins to to ripple out to people. Yeah. And you guys are doing it with your honey, right? I mean that you're you're producing. Thank you. I'll take that gift. This is amazing. I mean, and truthfully, what you're doing with this is is uh hopefully a bell weather. I hope so. I mean, I mean, you have it tested for purity, and I think purity needs to mean something. It's tested for purity. We test for 400. It doesn't mean it needs to be devoid of all the beast

[96:42] stuff. No. Right. It's raw. It's raw. It has propololis and Yeah. It's food and we test. Thanks for this. I've cooked with this before. Okay. I got I got our new nose collagen. You got the full lineage suite and I got some creatine for you. Do you take creatine? I do. Okay. Um, one of your buddies, I can't remember who it is, was advertising a creatine gummy the other day. And I went and looked at the creatine. I looked at the the creatine and it was good. The gummy not so much. Yeah, the gummy. And I mean, there's Why'd you have to pack it in a bunch of high fructose corn? I mean, it's easier to get down. Fair enough. But I mean, creatine is so tasteless. I don't know why in a gummy, but there's interesting research about creatine now. Maybe with like 10 to 20 grams a day. Who knows? I'll talk about that more soon. I've done some of that. So, I have a gift as well. Thank you. So, we have a one of our most avid supporters um makes these save the bee aprons. I love it. Uh I've seen you cooking in Costa Rica. I'll put one on. I wanted to I brought you one in black cuz I know you're you wear a lot of black t-shirts. Or if you're going to go shirtless, I got you one in white. Okay. You know, cuz I also know you do you're in your kitchen. You're working it. Thank you. So, there's a couple of Save the Bee uh aprons. And I know aprons not

[97:47] the most masculine thing in the world, but I rock one in the kitchen. I think you can rock one in the kitchen. gives you a little, you know, ups your game a little bit. It'll be interesting and I'm happy to support you guys. Where can people find more of what you're doing? So, savethebe.org and it's savethebe and uh again our, you know, we really work a lot with the western honeybee because that's the bee that's sort of been co-opted into our industrial um bee industry. But we, you know, we spend some time and we and we acknowledge that the that, you know, we say save the bee, we're we really are talking about the western honeybee as the main part of our mission. But we also work with people who are trying to save the wild bees. Wild bees are incredibly important. Um, in a in a in a perfect world, someday the apple cropped will be pollinated by a western honeybee, but also by there's another bee who specializes in apples. It's this one thing, and it'll just go out there. I mean, a a a couple thousand of those bees can do what tens or even hundreds of thousands of western honey bees can do. So, there's opportunities for the bee to be all it can be. And um we're trying to make sure that happens. So, save the bee.org. Um come and be a

[98:49] beekeeper. You can make a donation and do a $30 a month. Um become what we sort of one of our sustaining givers, which is a dollar a day. So, doing a little bit every day for the bee or just sign up and join. We're just getting this started. We've got just a, you know, few hundred people on our Instagram because it hasn't really been our focus. We've been out trying to make sure we're doing the programs right and aligning. We think we've really identified this is the spot for us. You know, we need to make sure that the bee has a voice. And I think that voice starts with people like you, people like me, some of our other corporate partners that I think are great. And then also, you know, more importantly, it's it's it's consumers. It's people out there, it's kids. And, you know, I just we're doing this not for our generation. We're going to suffer the consequences. We got to do it for these kids cuz we got to make sure our kids are healthy. We got to make sure that they're eating real food at night and they're getting up in the morning and having food that sustains them till lunch, doesn't just jack them up before they go to school and putting them to bed with good food in their gut. And I don't know, that's that's what that's kind of why I do it because I want to I want to live in a cool place called the planet Earth that's got full of all the amazingness that I've gotten to see through a

[99:50] blessed life being to see that. Yeah. Thanks for doing the work, man. Thanks for coming on the podcast.
