TITLE: I Tested the Top 7 Salts for Toxins (Only 2 Passed)
VIDEO ID: 9cmx-lt3n1w
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9cmx-lt3n1w
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-06
DURATION: 16:13
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] I tested seven different popular sea salts for heavy metals and lead, and this one came back as the worst. It was five times higher than the California Prop 65 level for lead. And if you're anything like me, it's probably in your pantry. I've definitely bought this salt before. In this video, I'm going to break down the results on all of these salts for all of the heavy metals, lead, arsenic, aluminum, and microplastics, and I'm going to rank them from best to worst. Salt may not seem like a big source of heavy metals like lead in your diet, but when I saw the results here, I was shocked. Let's get into it. Most of us use salt every single day at almost every single meal. Myself, I use 7 to 10 g of salt every single day. I put a little bit in my morning smoothie. I put it on my lunch. I put it on my breakfast and my dinner. So, it's really important to me to know if the salt that I'm using contains heavy metals because as I'm using salt at almost every single meal every single day, you could definitely accumulate these harmful heavy metals in your body. There's a lot

[01:00] of information, there's a lot of allegiances, and a lot of talk about salts online and in health communities. And the general consensus is that the more raw the salt is, you'll get more minerals and it's healthier. But, like I said, the results of this analysis completely shocked me and totally changed the way that I think about salt. Most of us don't even think about salt as a commodity or as a necessity in the human diet. But when I learned about the history of salt, this is crazy, guys. Did you know that the word salary is derived from the Latin word salarium, which was an allowance given to Roman soldiers thousands of years ago to buy salt? Before refrigeration and toxic preservatives that we have in our food supply today, salt was the original preservative. By salting meats, we were able to do cross-ocean journeys. The New World, Americas, South America, Central America, these places would never have been discovered without salt. Wars have been fought over salt and salt rights, and every indigenous culture that I've ever studied or spent time with uses salt and prizes salt. There's knowledge

[02:02] from the anthropological record and the study of hunter-gatherer tribes that indigenous humans, that our ancestors, would follow animal trails to salt lakes. That's how important salt is for human physiology. When we think of salt, we're technically thinking about sodium chloride, right? So, there's a sodium atom and a chloride atom. And both of those are essential minerals for human existence, for human life. We will crave salt. There is a good amount of salt in your blood. Your body tightly regulates the amount of sodium in your blood. It is so tightly regulated that even a little bit high or a little bit low can cause headaches, fatigue, fainting, swelling of the brain. This is hypernatremia and hyponatremia. So, your body needs sodium. You're losing sodium every time you pee, you have to replenish the sodium. Your body needs salt. Salt is a nutrient for humans, but it's gotten a bad rap, and I think it's completely misguided. Salt has been incorrectly vilified. The problem with salt and hypertension, high blood pressure, is not the salt

[03:03] itself. It's the underlying insulin resistance. I eat 10 plus grams of salt per day, and I have normal blood pressure. I'll go to the doctor or take my own blood pressure, and it's 110 or 115 over 70 mm of mercury, and I'm eating a lot of salt by conventional standards. Salt isn't going to give you high blood pressure. The underlying insulin resistance causes problems with your handling of the sodium ion and the other minerals in your body, and that's what leads to high blood pressure. So, do not fear salt. If you are strict about a low-salt diet, the only things you're going to accomplish are increased hypotension or lightheadedness when you stand up, erectile dysfunction, and an increase in stress hormones in your body like aldosterone. You don't want those things. So, getting enough salt is critical. What's the sweet spot? You know, the CDC, the FDA, the US dietary guidelines recommend around 3 to 4,000 mg of salt per day, which is about 2,000 mg of sodium. But I think most

[04:04] people do better with about twice that amount. I'm getting 7, 8, 9 g of salt per day. And remember that salt is sodium and chloride, so I'm getting 9 g of salt, I'm probably getting around 5,000, 4,500 mg of sodium per day. So, you can easily kind of see what works best for you. A lot of us do better with a little bit more salt, especially if you're going to the gym and you're sweating a lot, but you can kind of tweak and see what level of salt you're working with and then what's going to work best for your body. But I'll tell you this, restricting salt is not the way to feel good. It's not the way to have a adequate blood volume. It's not the way to have good workouts. It's not the way to feel good in your life. Some of the most striking history I've heard about salt has to do with warfare. Did you know that in the Civil War, the Union prioritized the destruction of the Confederacy's salt reserves? Because if they can't have salt in the Confederates from the South, they couldn't preserve food, and that is a major problem in warfare. Similarly, as we've talked about, salt is essential for proper immune function, proper wound healing.

[05:05] During Napoleon's 1812 retreat from Moscow, he lost a huge amount of his troops. Historical figures suggest that he started with 600,000 troops and lost 550,000 of those troops because they were so salt deficient that their wounds couldn't heal. It is really not hyperbole to say that salt has shaped human existence from the very beginning and especially modern human history in so many ways. We don't really drink blood that much today, but our ancestors did. Blood is very high in salt. So, there are natural sources of salt in freshly killed animal meat and organs, and drinking blood gave our ancestors a great amount of salt as a supplement in their diet. Today, we rely on sea salts because we're not drinking too much blood, and almost all of the meat we're getting has had to go through processing and sit in storage and sit in the butcher counter at grocery stores, but salt is essential and is definitely a key part of a healthy human diet. With all that said, when you're eating the salt, you don't want extra things that are bad for you, things like lead or

[06:05] other heavy metals. >> >> So, let's talk about lead, aluminum, and arsenic. These are the three metals that we found in these salts. Two of these salts had significantly elevated levels of lead and arsenic, and one of these salts had very high levels of aluminum. Lead is a bad thing for humans. It's a heavy metal. It accumulates in our bodies. It accumulates in our bones. It is bad for the kidneys. It is bad for your brain. It is associated with lower IQ, learning disabilities in children, and cancer if you accumulate it over time. We don't use lead-based paint anymore in our homes or lead-based gasoline at gas stations, but decades ago, our predecessors were exposed to much higher levels of lead. The Prop 65 guideline for lead is 0.5 micrograms. That is the most stringent level of lead. In children, the FDA standard is that a child doesn't eat more than 2.2 micrograms of lead per day. There is really no safe level for lead, and there's it's not a vitamin, you don't want any amount of it. The lower your

[07:06] lead consumption, the better. So, some people may look at these results of these salts and say, "Oh, that salt doesn't really have that much lead." Or other foods you eat also contain lead. This is true. Things like grains or potatoes, sweet potatoes. Many of the foods we eat have low levels of lead. But if I can show you, and I will, that some of these salts have no heavy metals, why would you not choose a salt that is completely free of heavy metals in favor of a salt that has heavy metals and is going to increase your consumption of lead and other problematic things? Right? So, then there's arsenic. Arsenic is a really bad heavy metal, consistently linked to cancers and other health issues in humans. You do not want arsenic. And some of these salts had more arsenic than others, I'll tell you that. The last one that we found in these salts was aluminum. You know, like that aluminum foil that you're using in your house? I never store my food on that because high levels of aluminum in the human diet have been linked to increased incidence, things like Alzheimer's dementia, cognitive decline. I think I hit my head a few too many times when I was a skier in my previous days. I don't need to lose any more neurons. I don't need any more cognitive

[08:07] decline than I'm going to have now in my life, so I'm not trying to get excess aluminum in my salt. So, lead, arsenic, and aluminum, these are the big heavy metals we're going to talk about in these salts. Let's get into the actual analysis, and I'm going to rank all these salts. >> >> So, for this analysis, we tested seven different brands of salts. We've got some highly refined salts like this Morton iodized salt. We've got minimally or moderately refined salts like this kosher Diamond Crystal salt. We've got sea salts like Maldon. We wanted to use brands that you guys are having in your home, that you're serving to your family. We didn't want to use obscure brands. So, these are the seven most popular brands we could find. >> >> People may say, "Why didn't you test Himalayan salt?" Good point. We probably should have, but we'll do it in the future. When I've looked at analyses of Himalayan salts, they're not very clean. What you'll see in this analysis, and if you look at Himalayan salts, is that rock salts from the earth are often more heavily contaminated with heavy metals. So, if you have a question about Himalayan salt, it's probably got significant amounts of heavy metals, and we'll show you that in the future. But

[09:08] from this analysis, we just looked at these seven salts for heavy metals and microplastics. Okay, so let's get into the rankings. So, I'm going to start with Morton iodized sea salt. This is a sea salt, but it's a refined sea salt, and it's iodized. I would prefer to have a salt that doesn't have iodine added. I'm getting iodine from raw milk, from eggs, from meat. I don't think I need extra iodine in my salt. And if you look at the ingredients of this salt, it's not only sea salt, it's also dextrose, potassium iodide, sodium bicarbonate, >> >> and yellow prussiate of soda, which is an anti-caking agent. I prefer my salts not have anti-caking agents. This salt was clean. It didn't have any microplastics or any heavy metals, but I'm going to call it it is number five out of seven because it has those anti-caking agents and other additives. And this one really surprised me. This is Redmond Real Salt. Because this is pulled from a mine in Utah, it had a significant amount of lead at 0.6 micrograms per serving. So, a serving is 1 tsp. I would >> >> potentially use this amount of salt in a single meal. Maybe it's a little more than I use in a meal. Most people might use 3 to 4 g in a meal. But, I want to

[10:10] understand this is not a large serving of salt at 5 g. The Redmond Real Salt had 0.6 micrograms of lead over the Prop 65 limit in one single teaspoon of salt. That's how I'm reporting these findings as micrograms of heavy metals per 5 g of salt or 1 tsp of salt. The Redmond Real Salt also had 0.75 mg of aluminum per tsp. Again, not a huge amount, but these things add up over time. I was bummed to see this one had a significant amount of lead and a significant amount of aluminum in the Redmond Real Salt. It also had a small amount of arsenic at 0.08 micrograms per tsp. That's not a ton, but many of these other salts had none. So, could have been better. Herkimer Sea Salt. I know a lot of you probably use this one is sold at Costco. It didn't have any significant lead or arsenic. That's the good news. Bad news is it had the highest amount of aluminum at 1.7 mg of aluminum per tsp. So, I would not use this one. Relative to the other salts, that is more aluminum than

[11:12] any other salt in the study. You've got Maldon and Jacobson. These are both very good sea salts. I use Maldon a lot when I'm traveling. Maldon has a really nice texture. It looks really cool. Neither of these had any heavy metals. So, no lead, no arsenic, no aluminum. The only strike against these is that there was a very small amount of microplastics in our testing. The problem with this is that we were testing for microplastics that were bigger than 1 micrometer. I want to repeat the testing and go look at nanometer size microplastics. That's very difficult and very technical. We'll hopefully do that in the future, but I figured if there were some micrometer size microplastics, >> >> they were probably smaller nanometer 50 to 500 nanometer microplastics in these salts. So, they had a small amount of microplastics, which is what kept them from the top spot, but they're very clean and these are great salts. So, what is the best salt? What's number one? And then I'll tell you what the worst salt is. So, number one, the best salt in this test is the Diamond Crystal Salt. Now, this surprised me a little bit, but this had no microplastics. It's actually packaged

[12:14] in a paper container and it had no lead, no mercury, no arsenic, no aluminum, nothing. So, this is a salt that I never even thought about. I probably had seen it on grocery store shelves and just walked by it. I don't need that salt. Who cares about that? Who cares? But, now this is probably my favorite salt. It tastes good. It doesn't have the same texture as a Maldon salt, but it's a very good salt from what I can see and it's very clean. It's from an underground deposit in Michigan that's been used for decades. It's made through a process called the Alberger process, which is a special evaporative process that gives the grains a special shape. It tastes pretty good. What I also love about the salt, it's super affordable. This is a small container. You can get a huge container for eight or nine bucks. It's way I've been spilling it all over the place. Look at that. That's great. We'll keep that in the video. This is a pound of Diamond Crystal Salt and this is even cheaper than this Maldon salt, which is half as much salt. So, in terms of cost and cleanliness, it's hard to beat the Diamond Crystal Salt and it tastes good. So, that's the number one.

[13:15] Now, the worst sea salt, I'm bummed about this one, guys. Celtic Sea Salt. I've used this a lot in my life, but check this out. 2.3 micrograms of lead per tsp. If you had 10 g of this, you could get almost 5 micrograms of lead per day just from this salt, which many of us use. It's actually not very clean. It had significant levels of lead, arsenic, and aluminum. Now, it's important to know Prop 65 lead 0.5 micrograms per serving. Even the FDA recommends that kids have less than 2.2 micrograms of lead per day. So, if you just put 5 g of this on your kids' food throughout the day, you've already eclipsed the FDA recommendation. Again, no safe level for lead just from the salt. There's other lead in their foods they're eating, especially if they're eating processed foods. It was almost the highest in every single thing we tested, which is clearly making it the worst It gets the booby prize. You do not want to be using this salt. I'm sorry to say. It seems like it would be healthy. It's trendy in

[14:16] health circles, but it squarely goes into the worst spot for salts. So, I want to re-emphasize I have no financial incentive here. Diamond Crystal isn't paying me and I have nothing against Celtic or Redmond. It's just this is the data. I want you guys to have real actionable information and remember, I did all these testings myself. I partnered with ABNRF, the Animal Based Nutrition Research Foundation, and all of these results are available online. One of the problems I had with salt analysis previously was that other blogs >> >> were saying that some of these salts had significant levels of heavy metals, but I couldn't find the COAs anywhere. So, I wanted to confirm this. Salt is a critical part of the human diet. Don't fear salt, but I think that the choice is clear here. You could use a salt like this or this, which has relatively speaking not massive levels of lead, arsenic, or aluminum, but significantly more than something like these. Why would you not use a salt that has no heavy metals and no microplastics? If you guys have other salts that you want to see tested, put it in the comments. I can do another analysis of the salts. I also want you

[15:18] to know that I've done a previous video analyzing heavy metals, BPA, PFAs, forever chemicals in water. Water and salt are two of the things that we don't think about a whole lot for contaminants, but if you are using clean bottled water, is plastic better? Is glass better? What brand is the best for bottled water? If you're using clean bottled water and clean salt, you can significantly reduce the exposure to heavy metals and other contaminants like BPA and PFAs, forever chemicals, for you and your family and that pays health dividends long-term. Share this video with people you know who are using salts that have high levels of aluminum or anti-caking agents or lead and arsenic when they could be making better choices. That's how it works for us as humans. We're all part of this remembering. We're all part of a tribe and we have to share with each other the useful health information so that we can all be healthier together. Check out my website paulsaladinomd.com for the full results. The link is in the description and I'll see you guys in the next video.
