TITLE: Avoid These Drinks At All Costs
VIDEO ID: AUuy4PHnMO8
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AUuy4PHnMO8
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-02-20
DURATION: 10:32
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] You've been lied to about alcohol, but guys, I was too. I went to medical school. In medical school, I was taught moderate drinking is healthy. You guys have maybe even seen a J-shaped curve that looks like this and suggests one to two drinks a day, a glass of wine a night is healthy. They are lies. They're propaganda. You've been misled and I've been misled. In this video, I'm going to talk all about alcohol. I'm going to talk about the $100 million trial paid for by the alcohol industry that misled you into thinking that one glass of wine a night is healthy when it's not. I'm also going to tell you how to drink. Yep, I'm going to tell you how to drink. If you insist on drinking, I'm going to tell you which alcohols are the best in terms of hangover prevention and which alcohols are the healthiest, which alcohols are the unhealthiest. And at the end of the video, I'm going to tell you how to prevent and how to minimize a hangover. And as a bonus, if you stick around till the very end of the video, I'm going to show you what my favorite drink is in a bar. So, let's get into it. For so many years, guys, we've been told a glass of wine a night is healthy, but it's a lie. And it was paid for by the alcohol industry. There was a collusion for many years, and there were many many trials, over 100 trials done

[01:02] that suggested, "Hey, small amount of alcohol, this can be healthy for you." We now know this is false. So, this $100 million lie, this $100 million propaganda trial is called the mock trial. I'll show a reference for it here. It raised $100 million from alcohol companies because researchers promised to show the J curve in all of its glory. It was collusion between research and industry, and the alcohol companies knew from the beginning that if they invested $100 million, they were going to get the study they wanted. It's called the mock trial, and it's a lie. It's not a J curve, it's a line. Any amount of alcohol is harmful for you, but we've only really seen this in the last 2 years. We now know that even one drink a day, averaged over the course of a week, can shrink your brain. Yes, one drink a day can shrink your brain. This is crazy. It shrinks the gray matter and the white matter in your brain. We also know that even one drink a day is not healthy for your heart. It's actually damaging from a cardiovascular perspective. This is crazy. It's groundbreaking information that we just learned in 2024. A

[02:03] researcher named Tim Stockwell reanalyzed over 100 trials, 107 trials to be exact, and published a meta-analysis looking at the relationship between alcohol consumption and cardiovascular health. The old relationship that we were all taught, including myself in medical school, was a J-shaped curve. What the J-shaped curve suggests is that small amounts of alcohol are actually healthier than no alcohol from a cardiovascular perspective. But this isn't the truth. When Tim Stockwell did the reanalysis of these 107 trials and republished his meta-analysis, he found that the J is actually a line. And this means that there is a linear geometric relationship between alcohol consumption and cardiovascular risk. The striking reality is that from the first drop you drink of alcohol, you are harming your heart. You are increasing your cardiovascular risk. Like I said, this is groundbreaking and it goes against all of the marketing that alcohol companies have been trying to tell you for decades and decades. But now there is an overwhelming amount of evidence to suggest this is the truth. But look, I

[03:05] know you guys are going to drink, so I'm going to tell you what the cleanest alcohols are and how to cure a hangover later in the video. But you need to know now that even one drop of alcohol, it sounds extreme and obviously I'm being slightly hyperbolic, but one drink, a small amount of alcohol, this is not healthy for you. There is no healthy amount of alcohol for humans. But let's be real, I know some of you guys are going to drink. I don't consume any alcohol, but it's your life and you get to enjoy it. I just wanted you to know the health information in the background. There's no healthy amount of alcohol. But if you go to a bar, and I'm actually sitting in a bar right now, guys, it's a little bit weird. Uh this is not AI. Uh what is the healthiest type of alcohol to drink? Well, there's a couple of things to consider here. The more alcohol you drink, the more it's going to impact your body. In order to metabolize alcohol, your body has to convert it to something called acetaldehyde. That's the toxic metabolite of alcohol that causes problems. So, at one level, drinking the lowest alcoholic drinks is going to be the best thing for your body. But, essentially, there's the same amount of alcohol in this beer as there is in one shot of bourbon. It's Jack Daniel's, I

[04:05] think. And one shot of tequila. So, you're not going to drink this amount of tequila, but there's essentially the same amount of alcohol in all three of these or a glass of wine, give or take. But, if you drink lower amounts of alcohol or you got a low alcoholic beer, that's really the healthiest way to do it. But, there's more to the story when it comes to the purity of the things you're drinking. What we know very clearly is that wine and beer have significant amounts of contaminants, even pesticides. We found significant levels of glyphosate, herbicide, Roundup, weed killer in beer and in wine. And they even find it in some bourbons. So, if you're worried about glyphosate, if you're worried about herbicides and Roundup, these definitely have it. If you're gluten intolerant, obviously drinking beer is going to expose you to gluten. So, think about those things. The next thing to consider is that clear alcohols like gin, vodka, and tequila actually have lower levels of congeners. Congeners are not what cause hangovers, but they can make it worse. What's a congener? Essentially, it's a byproduct of alcohol fermentation, and clear alcohols have

[05:07] less of them. So, if you're thinking about clean drinking, it's kind of true that a vodka, a tequila, or a gin is going to be cleaner in some ways than a bourbon, a beer, or a wine. So, let's talk about hangovers. What causes a hangover? Well, alcohol itself is dehydrating. When you drink alcohol, you're going to pee out more fluids than you can hold in your body. Dehydration is the biggest cause of hangover. And along with dehydration comes electrolyte imbalance. That's imbalance of things like sodium, magnesium, potassium in your body. Those are your electrolytes. The other part of a hangover is that alcohol must be metabolized to acetaldehyde in your body, and acetaldehyde is a toxic byproduct that creates inflammation and stress on your body. The fourth piece of it is congeners like we talked about. The last piece of what causes a hangover is poor sleep. Even though you might think alcohol helps you fall asleep and you don't remember what happened, you didn't sleep well. Alcohol, like marijuana, disrupts normal sleep architecture. So when you go out to the bar and you drink, even small amounts of alcohol, even a single drink, can

[06:08] interrupt normal sleep architecture. If you don't believe me, use whatever sleep tracker you prefer, an Oura Ring, a Whoop band, and check your sleep score and your sleep architecture with no alcohol and with a couple of drinks. You'll see a major difference. You don't sleep better when you drink, you sleep worse, but you might not know it. All those things combined to make hangovers pretty miserable. So what can you do to minimize hangovers? Well, there's three pieces of this. You can do things before, during, and after you drink, once you have the hangover, to minimize their severity. Let's start before. Before you start drinking, you want to be hydrated. You want to make sure that you're drinking plenty of water before you start drinking alcohol. And while you are drinking, if you intersperse the water between your drinks, that will decrease the hangover severity. Before you drink, it's also important to eat food. Having food like a steak, potatoes, whatever, in your stomach before you drink, maybe even some fruit or some honey, some fructose, this all slows down the absorption of alcohol into your body and the fruit and the fructose can actually improve your liver's ability to metabolize alcohol. So eating a meal like steak and fruit

[07:10] before you drink can actually decrease hangover severity. It sounds crazy, but it's true. Drinking clear alcohols like gin, vodka, and tequila will decrease your consumption of congeners, which can make the hangover severity less intense. So once you've got the hangover, you've woken up the next day and you've got a massive headache, what do you do? The main thing you're feeling with a hangover is electrolyte imbalance and dehydration. So, start with fluids. So drink water and use a good quality sea salt. You might actually want to supplement with magnesium as well. Don't use too much magnesium cuz that can make you poop. If you guys are interested in which type of magnesium to supplement with, I've done a whole YouTube on the pros and cons of different types of magnesium, which I'll put in the description below. But, if you're drinking water, using some salt, and adding magnesium, that's a good start. You also obviously want to rest, do as much as you can to get good sleep, even though the alcohol's messed it up, and eat some food. Even though your stomach might feel funky after drinking, getting food will help. And just as eating fruit or honey before drinking can help, eating fruit and honey, I know it sounds crazy. I didn't believe it until I read it, but it's true. Eating fruit and honey after you've drunk can help metabolize alcohol and

[08:12] improve the hangover severity. If you want a full protocol for hangover recovery, hangover prevention, and what alcohols are best and worst to drink, basically how to navigate bar life in general, you can find it at my website paulsaladinomd.com. I'll put a link in the description at the bottom directly there. You can go to the website and download it. But, you know what the best way is to cure a hangover? Don't drink in the first place. Look, this whole video has been done under the assumption that you're actually going to drink. But, when I go to bars, I don't drink. It's not worth it to me at all. Here's what I do drink when I go to bars. Who knows what this is? This could be vodka with lime and soda water. It's actually just sparkling water with a lime, but your friends don't know that. You could even get this in a smaller glass if you actually want to make it look like you're drinking a drink. You don't have to drink when you go to bars. In fact, here's what I want to tell you guys. You are all smart enough, you're sexy enough, you're good-looking enough, and you're charismatic enough to make friends and meet people or date or flirt in bars without alcohol. You actually don't need alcohol as a social lubricant, and the juice is just not worth the squeeze, guys. The negative

[09:13] effects of alcohol that I talked about earlier in the video are severe. They affect your brain. They affect your hormones. They affect your gut. They affect your heart. The best thing is just not to drink. But, if you're going to drink, drink clear alcohol, drink water between your drinks, eat before, during, and after, and maybe think about some fruit with your alcohol. But, like I said, cheers. This is really the best thing you can do at a bar. And look, I get it. Bars are great. It's good to be social. Bars are fine, guys. I actually don't mind going to bars provided the lights aren't horrible or it's got open air, but I think it's all about community. It's important to find your tribe. This is a huge important thing for me. It's one of the reasons I created the Animal-Based Gathering in Costa Rica. I'll put another link below in the description if you want to come join over 100 other folks who are interested in animal-based living and not drinking and actually being in nature in Costa Rica this May. But, if you don't come to the Animal-Based Gathering, there are animal-based gatherings all over the United States or just find a group of friends that doesn't encourage you to drink. If your friends don't think you're cool when you're drinking water, you need new friends, guys. Community is essential. It's actually been shown to be one of the most protective elements

[10:13] for humans long term. So, find a tribe, but find a healthy tribe. You should be able to go to a bar with your friends and drink whatever the heck you want. If you know someone who drinks and gets horrible hangovers and could benefit from this video, please send it to them. If you found value in this video, Cheers.
