TITLE: Avoid These Egg Brands At All Costs (Buy This Instead)
VIDEO ID: biaZgPq4Uw0
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=biaZgPq4Uw0
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-08-17
DURATION: 11:53
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] Look at this guys. You come to buy eggs, how do you know what to buy? There's free range, outdoor access, pasture-raised, regenerative, organic. How do you know? In this video, I'm going to break it all down for you. I'm going to buy a dozen >> >> of every single one of these eggs, and I'm going to break it down. I'm going to show you guys how to rank these eggs based on what they say on the labels, and I'm going to crack open all these eggs and compare them so that you know what the best eggs are and what to buy when you're here at Whole Foods or any grocery store based on what's on the label and what the chickens are eating and how they're living. Let's go. I've got to carry all these eggs to the front of the store. Hopefully, I won't drop any of them and break them. Let's go. So, I bought a hundred dollars worth of eggs from the store, and I went to the farmers market to get special farmers market eggs here. How do you know what the best eggs are to buy? In this video, I'm going to break it down everything you need to know about how to buy eggs. Obviously, the better eggs are

[01:00] going to be a little more expensive, and the less good eggs are going to be cheaper. But, what I'm going to show you is how to choose the best quality egg. You guys are going to have to decide if you think the price is worth the quality. I think it is, but let's get into it. So, the basic bottom level of eggs, at least at Whole Foods, just says outdoor access. They don't say free range because when you use that terminology, you have to legally provide the chickens with a certain amount of space. Outdoor access basically means that all these chickens could just be kept in a warehouse with a small door, and they can go outside, but maybe they never even go outside. So, outdoor access is kind of a weak term that sounds like it's humane, but it's not very humane. If you're shopping at grocery stores that are not Whole Foods, you might see cage-free on the label. Cage-free doesn't even mean the chickens can go outside. This is the most misleading term used with raising chickens and with eggs. Cage-free basically means the chickens aren't in cages. They're all shoulder to shoulder

[02:00] in a warehouse packed in. I would recommend you do not buy cage-free eggs, but again, all eggs are nutritious, so cage-free eggs, even regular eggs, are better than no eggs. Outdoor access is probably a level up from cage-free, but it doesn't really mean that much. So, these eggs here are labeled free range. It's basically outdoor access. There are some legal requirements for how much room a chicken has indoors when it's called free range, but most regulations say that a chicken needs 1 ft to 1 and 1/2 sq ft of space indoors with access to the outdoors to be free range. So, free range, outdoor access, those are basically the same thing. Not much space outdoors. We don't even know where they're going outdoors. They could have space outdoors that's a concrete pad in a parking lot somewhere. You don't know. What's the best way to raise chicken in terms of the labeling? It's pastured raised. As you will see on the labels, this means 108 sq ft per chicken. And you hope that when they say pastured raised, the chickens are actually on

[03:01] grass, which means the chickens could eat bugs and worms and get out in the sun. Chickens need vitamin D just like humans do. So, when it's saying pastured raised, you can believe the chicken has a little bit healthier life and is going to make a healthier egg. But that's not the end of it. Some of these eggs say organic. Some of them don't say organic. What does that mean? All of these chickens are fed grains. It's basically impossible to raise chickens today without feeding them grains. If you had absolutely wild chickens, maybe 100% of their diets could be bugs and worms. And I can guarantee you those would probably be the best eggs you have ever eaten. But just because of the scale of egg manufacturer, that can't happen. So, all the chickens are fed grains. And many of these chickens are fed grains that includes corn and soy. Grains to which many people will have allergies. So, these farm fresh eggs are corn and soy-free eggs, meaning they are fed other grains. If the eggs are labeled organic, it means the grains the chickens are eating are organic. If the eggs are not labeled organic, they're

[04:01] getting grains that are conventional, and those grains are going to have pesticides on it, which can go into the chicken and into the egg. So, when you can, I would select organic eggs. These are regular chickens eating regular grains. Here we have organic outdoor access, they're getting organic grains. Here we have organic free-range again, so they're getting outdoors and they're eating organic grains. On all of these eggs, you'll also see something that says grade A. What does that mean? It basically has to do with the visual appearance of an egg. It's going to be a symmetric egg, a clean egg, an uncracked egg. So, the grade A on the label doesn't tell you much. Grade B eggs do exist, but they are much lower quality and they're mostly used in processed foods. So, if you're getting processed foods with eggs, those eggs might be grade B. You're not going to buy grade B eggs in a grocery store. Some of these eggs also say large, large white. There are large, extra large, and medium-size eggs. Again, it doesn't have anything to do with the egg quality. It just tells you what the actual size of the egg is

[05:02] going to be. And then the last thing to notice here is that some of these labels say regenerative. Regenerative is a term people can use on the eggs that doesn't have any legal teeth. They can legally say regenerative without having to prove anything. But what these manufacturers are hinting at is perhaps that the chickens have a little more space, that they move the chickens from pasture to pasture, because that's what regenerative is supposed to mean, at least in terms of cow agriculture. When they say regeneratively raised grass-fed beef, it means that the cows are moving from pasture to pasture and are often eating higher quality grass in the newly moved pastures, rather than the grass they have eaten down to the bottom of the soil. So, regeneratively raised is theoretically better than not regeneratively raised, but we don't know for sure. You can see here on the Vital Farms, it says restorative and above that they've written restores the soil, supports the ecosystem, biodiversity. Again, the idea is that the chickens

[06:02] would move from pasture to pasture and that would improve the quality of the soil. Theoretically, it's a good thing, but again, we don't actually know what that means because there's nothing legally that binds Vital Farms, New Barn, or Whole Foods when they put that on the label. The last piece of this equation is the color of the eggs. The color of the egg is determined by the genetics of the chicken that lays the egg. All eggs start out white in chickens and chickens have a reproductive tract, well, female chickens are called hens and in the oviduct of the hens, there are pigments that can get deposited in the shell that turn it from white to brown. In this case, it's a pigment called protoporphyrin nine. In the case of the blue eggs, it's a pigment called oocyanin. The color of the eggshell means nothing with regard to the health of the chicken or hen that laid the egg or the quality and the nutrients in the egg. It's really just a vanity metric and believe me, when I was in Whole

[07:03] Foods, there were a lot of people who came up to the blue eggs and said, "Oh, they're so cute." and they buy the blue eggs just because they look pretty. It means nothing regarding the quality of the eggs, but now I'm going to show you how you can tell what is actually in the egg and the actual quality of the egg based on what happens when you crack the egg. A lot of people think that when you look at an egg, the color of the yolk tells you about the quality of the egg. Theoretically, this is true, but not in practice because a lot of companies today are smart to this and they started feeding chickens marigold or other orange type pigmented foods that can make the yolk artificially orange. In the wild, yes, a chicken eating bugs and worms is going to be getting more beta-carotene. We see this in meat. Cows eating more grass or cows eating higher quality grass will have much more orange in their fat from the beta-carotene in the grass. So, in practice, if a chicken is in the wild, yes, the yolk should be more orange, but the manufacturers are

[08:04] kind of gaming the system, so you can't just rely on the color of the yolk. But, when we crack these open, you're going to see a lot of differences in the colors. What you really want to look at is the thickness of the white and the yolk height. So, I'm going to put all of these eggs onto this plate, and we're going to see between all of them which one has the thickest white and the highest yolk. The tallest yolk, the most robust, the most erect, and the thickest white, that's what we want. If you find this video helpful, please leave me a like. These things help me reach more people. The whole goal of this is to affect as many lives as possible positively. Eggs are confusing, but they're a very nutritious food. If you have questions about how many eggs to eat or what else to eat in your diet, check out my website paulsaladinomd.com. I have a free quiz there and three dietary guides we worked very hard on which are completely free once you take the quiz. With that in mind, let's get back to cracking open these eggs. Thank you for helping me have this video reach

[09:06] more people. So, you guys can see here, we've got all nine different types of eggs, and you can see there's a lot of different color variation between the yolks. What makes me think these eggs are a little bit suspect is because though the yolk is orange, the white is kind of transparent. You can see this here. I used a flashlight. Let's look at the yolk height. So, if I'm looking at these, I think that this guy, this guy, and this guy have the highest yolk height. So, these two from Vital Farms, the Restorative Pasture Raised, the Organic Pasture Raised from Vital Farms, and these Farm corn and soy-free eggs. These have the highest yolk heights when I'm looking at them visually on this plate. Let's rank all these eggs starting with the S tier. The best two different eggs that I'm seeing here based on yolk height, white thickness, and white color are the farm-raised eggs, not super surprising cuz these are a much smaller operation. They are likely pasture-raised getting more bugs and worms. And I'm actually impressed by these Vital Farms pasture-raised organic eggs. So, A tier, I'm going to give the

[10:07] Restorative pasture-raised from Vital Farms. And the ladies are going to love this, the True Blues, the heirloom blue eggs. Those actually look pretty good. So, let's give those A tier also. B tier, I'm going to give these organic regenerative pasture-raised eggs and these regenerative organic certified Whole Foods eggs B tier. They say they're pasture-raised and organic, but they're pretty much B tier. The yolks look a little more deflated and the whites are not as thick. And then we go to C tier. We've got the large grade A brown eggs, which are organic outdoor access, and the organic free-range eggs. Again, the yolk is not as high and the white is not as thick. And then D tier, not surprisingly, we've got the outdoor access large white grade A eggs. You might be misled because that yolk is a little bit orange, but the white is just so pale and anemic and clear and white that I don't think that's a good egg. The white is kind of runny and the yolk is not very high. And it's mostly based on the visual look of the egg yolk, the

[11:10] height, the thickness of the yolk, and the thickness of the white and the color of the white. So, you guys have to let me know what you think in the comments. If this video has been helpful for you, I do content like this every single week breaking down health in ways to help you guys live a better, higher quality of life. Please share this video with someone you know who goes to the grocery store and sees all of these eggs and doesn't know what to buy. All things considered, I think that eggs are worth paying extra for to get higher quality. Eggs are incredibly nutritious with tons of nutrients. I will see you in the next video.
