TITLE: The Truth About Using Nicotine in 2026
VIDEO ID: kGqGeYdPxMk
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kGqGeYdPxMk
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-08-21
DURATION: 27:59
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] Philip Morris, the company that sold you Marboro cigarettes, sold 581 million cans of this last year, and they're using the same chemical trick that made cigarettes super addictive. In this video, I'm going to tell you about that chemical trick, and we're going to go through nicotine from A to Z. Here's the thing nobody's willing to say out loud about nicotine. For 50 years, the public health establishment told you nicotine was the villain. Nicotine causes cancer. Nicotine kills. Nicotine is as addictive as heroin. And most of that was wrong or at least deeply misleading. The villain was really the delivery system for most of the time that people were smoking cigarettes. The 7,000 chemicals, the 70 carcinogens, the ammonia which you are freebasing when you smoke a cigarette, the MAO inhibitors, nicotine is a molecule that occurs normally in the human body that was trapped inside a horrible machine originally with cigarettes. So once we figured out the truth, the pendulum swung and now a lot of people see nicotine as mostly harmless, possibly even beneficial. Andrew Huberman is

[01:01] discussing the ways that nicotine can be a cognitive enhancer on his neuroscience podcast. He adds cautions about how addictive nicotine is, but I think most people just hear that nicotine can be a cognitive enhancer and they skip over his warnings. Peter Theal says it increases your IQ 10 points. Talente has nicotine vending machines in their offices. So suddenly nicotine isn't the villain anymore. It's a wellness supplement in a little white pouch. Today I'm going to tell you the actual story of nicotine. All 12,000 years of it. It's a fascinating story. What it actually does in your brain, the benefits and the costs. The wellness crowd isn't telling you about how cigarettes, vapes, and nicotine pouches like this actually compare when you look at the science. and I'm going to give you a framework for making the best possible decision when it comes to your health, your nervous system, and your cognition. In this video, I'm also going to tell you about a neuroscientist who has studied nicotine for decades. His conclusions about the neotropic effects of nicotine are going to surprise you, and they're going to put a lot of people

[02:01] on blast. You also might think nicotine relieves your anxiety, but this isn't entirely true. So, let's get into the history of nicotine and start 12,000 years ago. In 2021, archaeologists found charred seeds of a wild tobacco plant dating back over 12,000 years at an archaeologic dig that unearthed the campsite in the Utah desert. But here's what matters more than the timeline, how they used it. Indigenous people across North America have traditionally used tobacco. The Lakota used it in prayer, believing that the tobacco smoke would carry prayers into the spirit world. The Irakcoy used it to seal treaties. Coastal tribes used it to treat all sorts of afflictions, snake bites, ear infections, skin conditions, all kinds of things. The Karoo people used wild tobacco and mixed it with other plants for a variety of ceremonies and medicinal purposes as well. In almost every way, the use was occasional. A small amount of wild tobacco, nothing like what is in here, much lower nicotine that is much less bioavailable

[03:02] for the human body. This was an intentional relationship with a plant. And that distinction is the foundation for everything that I'm going to tell you because what happened next was one of the most profitable acts of destruction in human history. In 1994, under congressional pressure, the tobacco industry disclosed 599 chemical additives in a cigarette. Over a 100 of them served one single purpose, to make it more addictive. They took something that humans have had a relationship with for thousands of years and totally adulterated it. Here's what they did. They added ammonia compounds, specifically diam ammonium phosphate, to convert nicotine into its freebased form. That's the exact same process that's used to convert cocaine into crack. Freebased nicotine crosses the bloodb brain barrier much more rapidly than nicotine salts that occur in wild tobacco. This makes the nicotine high you get from a cigarette much more intense, much faster, and much more addictive. You may not know this, but when Marlboro cigarettes were first released, they were considered a ladies

[04:04] cigarette. They were mild, not as intense, not as addictive, not as spiky with their high. But then Marboro figured something out. They could convert nicotine to the freebase form with this diamonium phosphate. Almost overnight, Malboro sales went through the roof as people experienced quick, strong, cravable highs with a form of nicotine, the freebased form of nicotine that doesn't occur in wild tobacco. They also added bronco dilators, pharmaceutical compounds like the ones people with asthma use, to open your airways so you could inhale deeper, so the freebased nicotine in a cigarette could get deeper into your lung. They added sugars that produce acid aldahhide when they burn. A compound that inhibits the breakdown of dopamine that leads to a bigger high, more addiction, and more craving. Again, all sinister. But there's a problem with freebased nicotine. It's very irritating for your throat. So, what did they do? They added menthol to cigarettes to numb your throat so you could smoke longer and inhale more deeply and get more of this freebase nicotine. When you light

[05:05] that cigarette, combustion produces over 7,000 chemicals. At least 70 of these are known carcinogen formaldahhide, benzene, arsenic, carbon monoxide. These are horrible for you. And in case you guys are wondering, yes, I have smoked a cigarette in my life. I smoked one and a half cigarettes when I was 13 years old. If my mom is watching this video, she will not be happy about that. I was a skater. I was hanging out with kids who were not good influences on me. And you'll love this. I smoked a cigarette and then I ate McDonald's. And then later in the afternoon, I smoked another cigarette. And halfway through that cigarette, I thought, I don't want to be a smoker. And I threw it away. And I've never smoked another cigarette since. I probably wasn't really inhaling the cigarettes deeply, but I at least wanted to look cool in front of my friends. Big mistake. My life would have been very differently if I'd been a smoker for the last 30 plus years. Nicotine is not really the villain. Not in the way we were originally told it was. The Royal College of Physicians in the UK has concluded that nicotine is not a

[06:06] significant contributor to smoking related diseases. People use nicotine patches sometimes for months or years to quit smoking with no evidence for increased in cancer related incidents. Here's what the tobacco industry did. Philip Morris, R.J. Reynolds, etc. that was truly diabolical. They built a machine that really kills with all of those chemicals, the freebased nicotine, the sugar, the acid aldahhide, the dopamine inhibitors, the menthol. They blamed nicotine for what their processing of the tobacco really did. For years, nicotine and cigarettes were essentially the same in the public mindset. This confusion kept people smoking. People who could have switched to something that was less harmful. I'm not saying that smoking tobacco is harmless, even if you smoke something like a natural wild tobacco cigarette. I'm not saying that at all. But I am showing you how the cigarette companies made it much worse and kept people confused, which is a strategy that many processed food companies still employ today. And that led to millions and

[07:08] millions of Americans and people worldwide suffering horrible consequences, cancer, and even death. We had a number of dark decades for American health during the heyday of cigarettes. And then we began to wake up to the harms of smoking and then came vaping. So in 2015, a Stanford startup called Jewel figured out something that completely changed the game. They borrowed a technology from Swedish, nicotine salts, and they put it in something that looked like a USB drive, creating the vaping craze. The thing about nicotine salts is that they deliver nicotine at a lower pH. This leads to less throat irritation, which means you can take a much bigger dose of nicotine without burning the back of your throat. Jules Pods contained about 5% nicotine by weight, equivalent to about a pack of cigarettes in a single Jewel pod. They marketed it to adults as smoking sessation. Go from this to this. This is better for you, right? But the flavors they devised for the original Jewel vase suggested that their

[08:10] intentions were not entirely benign. Mango, mint, cucumber, creme brulee. By 2018, Jewel controlled 75% of the ecigarette market and jeweling was a term well known within every high school in the United States. Jewels have, for the most part, gone out of style now because of FDA limitations, but because of an FDA loophole, these disposable devices are still allowed to have flavors. Jewels are not allowed to have flavors anymore. They only have menthol and tobacco, but these disposable devices can have every flavor under the sun because they're disposable. Ultimately, vaping did something interesting. It separated nicotine from smoking, which opened the door for what came next. In 2024, Americans bought $581 million packs of Zin, $1.8 billion in revenue. That's the fourth largest

[09:11] tobacco brand in the world behind Marlboro, Newport, and Camel. In 2022, Philip Morris acquired Swedish Match, the company that owns Zin for $16 billion. The same company that spent decades engineering cigarettes to be as addictive and as strong a high as possible. Zin influencers link pouch use to confidence, masculinity, and mental sharpness. I think they're selling you a bag of lies. Peter Theo says, "Nicotine raises your IQ 10 points." an assertion that has never been proven by the research and as we will get to in a moment has in many ways been disproven very strongly. Dave Asprey, who I've done podcasts with, has called it a powerful smart drug and has invested in a competing pouch brand. Tucker Carlson, a huge podcaster on the right, has even created his own brand of pouches with the interesting tagline, "Zin is for they/ them." So, here's what I need you

[10:13] to see. The first time, the industry built a poisonous delivery system, 599 chemical additives, and blamed the nicotine molecule. The second time, they stripped the molecule out of the machine, put it in cleaner packaging, and told you it was harmless or even beneficial. Both times, the goal is exactly the same. Earlier in this video, I told you there was a researcher who came to some shocking conclusions. This researcher's name is Paul New House. He's a PhD at Vanderbilt University. He's been studying nicotine in the human brain for 30 years and this is what he discovered that in a healthy person nicotine does not enhance cognition. If you are sleeping enough, if you are exercising enough, if your diet is good, nicotine does nothing for you. It only pushes you down the other side. There's nowhere to go from there. And this is the lie that has been sold to you. Originally, the lie around cigarettes was that they were cool or that you would be a cowboy or they would sexy or they would improve fertility. Doctors even told us these were healthy for us. And now the biggest lie around nicotine

[11:15] is that it's benign and that it's a neotropic. And I think this needs to be challenged because in the best research that has been done on nicotine at Paul New House's lab, they have consistently found that in a healthy human, nicotine does nothing for you and it might even harm you. Now, for the sake of completeness, I want to point out that in their research, they have shown that if your cognition is impaired, if you have mild dementia or memory issues, nicotine supplementation may be helpful. But if you are a healthy human, nicotine supplementation is likely not helping you. All of us being sold this noatropic headline for nicotine are probably being fed a lie. Let's get into how nicotine actually works in the brain and go deeper down this rabbit hole. Nicotine is an alkyoid from tobacco. Tobacco is in the nightshade family, the same family as tomatoes and goji berries and eggplant and peppers. All of these foods contain naturally occurring nicotine. But to get the amount of nicotine found in a single cigarette, you would have to eat 20 pounds of eggplant. And obviously

[12:18] the absorption of nicotine through your stomach and through your lungs directly into your bloodstream are different. So you do get some nicotine in the foods you eat, especially if you are eating foods from the nightshade family, but the pharmacocinetics and the actual pharmacology of that in your human body are very different and the amounts are massive. In your brain, when you smoke a cigarette or you use a vape or you use a nicotine pouch, that nicotine goes into your bloodstream and it crosses the bloodb brain barrier. In your brain, nicotine binds to something called the nicotinic acetyloline receptor. There is actually no nicotine naturally produced in the human body. But this receptor is called a nicotinic acetyloline receptor based on historical research where researchers use nicotine to activate the receptor. The actual endogenous lian, the thing in your body that binds to the nicotinic acetyloline receptor is acetyloline. Acetyloline is one of your body's most important neurotransmitters for learning, memory, and attention. When exogenous nicotine from any one of

[13:18] these sources crosses the bloodb brain barrier and binds to these nicotinic acetyloline receptors in your brain, it triggers the release of multiple other neurotransmitters. Most importantly, dopamine associated with reward and motivation. Anything that triggers the release of dopamine in your body is very addictive. Caffeine, anyone? Nicotine also triggers the release of norepinephrine, associated with alertness and focus, and betaendorphine, which is linked to pain relief and calm. The effects of nicotine on the human body are real. They've been documented in many studies. I know that some of you will debate what I said earlier about nicotine not having any benefits on the human body, especially in terms of complex cognition. And so, I want to address that. There's a 2010 metaanalysis by Hushman that did find benefits to nicotine supplementation. But there's some details here we have to look at. This was a metaanalysis of 41 double blind placeboc control trials. A lot of these studies actually used smokers and they had the smokers not smoke for 4 hours and then gave them a nicotine patch. Well, of course, you're going to find improvements in attention

[14:19] or memory or fine motor skills if you deprive a smoker of smoking for 4 hours and then give them a nicotine patch back. It's also been noted by researchers like Paul New House that the end points of Hushman's metaanalysis did not equate to intelligence. They did not equate to complex problem solving or complex calculations. That's what we're really interested in. Does Zen make you smarter? As Peter Teal says, if it's a neotropic, that's great, but does it really do that? When I look at the nicotine research, I think the evidence is very weak. I don't think nicotine makes you smarter. New House would argue that being able to pay attention when you're slightly tired or being able to click a mouse faster in response to a visual cue on a computer screen does not equate to complex thinking or calculations or any increase in intelligence. So, we're really looking at two different things here. I think both Hushman and New House would agree on something called the Jüks Dodson law. This law suggests that there's an optimal level of arousal, mental arousal for task completion and focus. Hushman would argue that most people are

[15:20] underaroused, which may be true if people have slight mental impairment, if they're withdrawing from tobacco, or if they're wildly sleepd deprived. But New House would argue that in an individual that's well-slept and wellfed, eating good foods, you're not going to get a benefit to that arousal level. So, in certain situations, there do appear to be benefits to nicotine. Parkinson's research may be one of these. There is over 50 studies suggesting that nicotine users have a 60% lower risk of Parkinson's. There are other things that contribute to Parkinson's, environmental toxins, poor sleep, poor diet, but nicotine may have a benefit in preventing Parkinson's. And Paul Newhouse and his group at Vanderbilt University have given nicotine to people with mild cognitive impairment and found improvements in function. But again, we have to remember that nicotine is not a vitamin. You do not need nicotine to prevent Parkinson's disease. You can also significantly lower your risk of Parkinson's disease and nearly every other chronic disease by sleeping enough and eating good quality foods. If you want to know how to eat, there's a free guide to carnivore, animal-based, and

[16:21] eating like a human at my website, Paul Saladino MD. I think that if you improve your sleep and you improve your eating, you can basically get all of the gains of something like this with none of the negative side effects, which we're going to get to in a moment. There are some cognitive benefits in the research, but as Paul New House has pointed out, they're modest, they're small, and they don't make you smarter. The effect sizes were 0.16 to 0.44. That's small to moderate in scientific research terms. And here's a striking statistic that nobody's talking about. A 2020 systematic review found that 59% of researchers publishing studies on the cognitive benefits of nicotine had prior or current tobacco industry funding. And over half of them didn't disclose it. But even taking the research with potential small to moderate maybe relevant maybe not benefits at face value. Here's the part that changes everything. Tolerance develops within weeks. Your brain adapts. When you flood your nicotinic acetyloline receptors with nicotine day after day, an interesting thing happens. The nicotine actually causes your brain to produce more of these receptors, but they're

[17:23] stuck in a state that needs nicotine to function properly. A 2012 study from the Baylor College of Medicine measured what happens to your dopamine when you use nicotine. Remember that dopamine is reward and motivation. After 12 weeks of nicotine use, 3 months withdrawal of nicotine produced a 29% drop in baseline dopamine. When you stop nicotine, after just 3 months of nicotine use, your baseline dopamine levels will crash. And to make matters worse, the deficit in a study persisted for at least 10 days. This is why nicotine is so hard to quit because one hit of nicotine brings it back up to baseline levels. So, in order to quit any of these sources of nicotine that you thought were going to be cognitive enhancers that didn't actually end up to be cognitive enhancers, you have to go through 10 plus days of lower than normal levels of dopamine, lower than normal levels of motivation, lower than normal levels of attention and focus. That sounds like a horrible thing, guys. That's what you're setting yourself up for when you use one of these products. Philip Morris knew it

[18:23] with Marorrow and they know it was Zin. Within weeks of using these things, you need exogenous nicotine just to feel normal. The bump you feel when you use one of these products, it's not a bump. It's just returning to normal levels. The cognitive boost you feel when you use these things is not a cognitive boost. It's sensation of withdrawal. You've lowered your own baseline dopamine and you need the drug just to get back to where you started. Without it, you don't just return to your old baseline. You go lower. brain fog, difficulty concentrating, anhidonia, which means difficulty feeling pleasure and things you used to enjoy, irritability. All of these happen when you withdraw the drug, the nicotine that you thought was going to be a cognitive enhancer, but it didn't pan out. Not a good deal. This is the trade-off that nobody in the industry is talking about right now. But beyond all of this, I need to tell you about the harmful effects of nicotine in your body. According to the scientific literature, a 2025 review in the European Heart Journal concluded that no nicotine delivery system, not cigarettes, not vaping, not nicotine pouches, can be

[19:24] considered safe for the heart and blood vessels. And this is because of the direct effects of the nicotine molecule on our vasculature and our heart. So nicotine acts in the brain and releases all of those neurotransmitters, but it also turns on your fightor-flight nervous system. Every dose raises your heart rate 10 to 15 beats a minute and every dose raises your blood pressure 5 to 10 millm of mercury. Chronic use of nicotine can impair endothelial function. Those are the cells that line your blood vessels. It can increase the propensity of your blood vessels to clot. It can constrict your blood vessels, making them smaller. A 2024 study found that ecigarette users were 20% more likely to develop heart failure. This isn't the additives in the vape. This is the nicotine in the product. itself causing an overload on the cardiovascular system. Another huge area of concern with nicotine use in any form of delivery is sleep. But this is one that should stop every productivity hack user of nicotine in their track. A 2025 study in the journal Sleep Medicine looked at deep sleep in nicotine users,

[20:25] smokers, vapors, and those who were using clean forms of nicotine. They found that nicotine users got 32 minutes less deep sleep per night than nicotine non-user. That's striking. The disrupted sleep architecture of tobacco pouch users looked identical to the disrupted sleep architecture of cigarette users. Lowering your sleep quality and decreasing the amount of deep sleep that you're getting is going to age you faster than almost anything else you could possibly do. Deep sleep is incredibly important and regenerative for humans. And decreasing it with this is a non-starter. Everything I've said so far applies to adult brains, but the conversation shifts entirely if you are under 25 years old. If you are young and using nicotine or thinking about using nicotine, you have to listen to this. Your preffrontal cortex, the region of the brain that controls decision-m, impulse control, and emotional regulation, is one of the last regions of the brain to fully develop. And nicotinic acetyloline receptors play a critical role on how the connections

[21:26] between neurons and the wiring of your prefrontal cortex is mapped out. A 2024 study in Nature's Communications Biology Journal found that adolescent exposure to nicotine affects the brain very differently than adult exposure. Qualitatively different effects in the prefrontal cortex, the nucleus ccumbent, and the vententral tegmental area. Nicotine pouch use among the youth has quadrupled between 2022 and 2025. Lifetime use among 12th graders went from 7% to 10% in a single year. If you are under 25 years old and you do not currently use nicotine, do not start. Now, let's compare these three things. Let's start with cigarettes. Combustion, 7,000 chemicals, 70 known carcinogens, 480,000 American deaths per year. This is absolutely the worst thing you could possibly be doing. Vaping smells like chemicals. No combustion. Formaldahhide 13 times lower than cigarettes. Acid

[22:27] aldahhide 800 times lower than cigarettes. Lead, nickel, chromium, copper. Your lungs are being exposed to heavy metals that don't belong there. One disposable vape released more lead in a single day's use than 20 packs of cigarettes. Your lungs are being exposed to metals that simply don't belong there. Vaping is substantially less harmful than smoking cigarettes. I'll say that clearly. If you smoke and you switch to vaping, you've made a massive improvement. But a massive improvement from possibly the worst product ever given to humans is not a big improvement. Nicotine pouches, no combustion, no inhalation, nothing in your lungs. On the harm continuum, pouches sit well below cigarettes and vaping. That's real. But here's what you should know also. Zin pouches use sodium carbonate, a base, to increase the pH of nicotine, converting it to its freebase form. This leads to increased absorption rates through your gums. Nicotine pouches are the least harmful delivery

[23:28] method for nicotine other than pharmaceutical nicotine replacement like gum and patches. But least harmful is not the same as harmless. And the dependency they create is very real. And previously in this video, we've discussed how the harms of nicotine are also very real regardless of the delivery method. Nicotine doesn't cause cancer, but it has a host of other side effects. increases your blood pressure, increases your heart rate, increased rate of heart failure, increased anxiety, turning on your sympathetic nervous system, disturbing sleep, on and on and on. And it probably doesn't really do much for your cognition. Unless you're already sleepd deprived and you're already foggy and it gets you stuck in a loop of addiction and a loop of usage, withdrawal, and anxiety. That's not great. In fact, it's horrible. Okay, guys, here's what I want you to take away from this. Cigarettes are the single deadliest product in human history. Now, the wellness industry has almost captured it again, stripping it away from the toxic machine, packaging it in a way that they say is non-toxic, and trying to tell you

[24:30] it's an actual neurotropic when the data suggests that that is not entirely true or perhaps not true at all. Remember that both narratives are designed to sell you something and the same company owns both of these products. What is Philip Morris going to do when you stop buying cigarettes and the public realizes that cigarettes are very harmful? They're going to buy Zen and sell you 581 packages of this per year. I'm sure it's increasing in 2025, getting millions of people addicted to nicotine who are going to struggle to get off and go through a horrible cycle of withdrawal. I do not believe nicotine is a benign molecule. I am quite confident that nicotine is going to get you very quickly addicted and cause cycles of withdrawal and craving, anxiety, increasing your sympathetic nervous system activation, increasing your blood pressure, heart rate, increasing your rate of heart failure, and many other negative things. And the idea that it's a neurotropic with no downsides is simply false. and unfounded. If you have dementia or mild cognitive impairment, something like this might actually be beneficial, as could nicotine gum or a patch, which are probably even less harmful because you're not going to end up with mouth lesions or gum recession. But I really wanted to get this video out there to tell people that we are, in my opinion,

[25:31] being lied to. We're being misled about the downsides of nicotine and about the upsides of nicotine. We have to be very honest with ourselves and honest with our appraisal of nicotine's lack of benefits in the majority of us. So my simple urging to you is do not get addicted to nicotine. And if you are already addicted to nicotine, please move down the hierarchy of harm, cigarettes, vaping to tobacco pouches. And then to quit the tobacco pouches, here is the best quick protocol. No matter what type of nicotine you're trying to quit, consider this. Think of it as a 333 rule. If you're choosing to cold turkey nicotine, which is a reasonable strategy depending how much you've been using, the first three days are going to be the worst. If you can get through those, think about the next three weeks. You're going to have a psychological addiction. you're going to be reaching for it in your pocket depending what you're using. If you can get through the first 3 weeks, your chances of success are very high, but then you have to get through the next 3 months. And that is the period where you still have to keep your guard up. So 3 days, 3 weeks, 3 months. So that's if you completely go cold turkey. Depending how much nicotine you're using, you could also try tapering. So, if you're

[26:31] using a lot of nicotine, I would say multiple pouches a day, lots of vaping, multiple cigarettes a day or a pack a day, you want to taper down your usage of nicotine gradually. And then when you are at a low nicotine usage, perhaps a minimal amount of puffs or just a few of the pouches a day, you then just have to go cold turkey. Remember that nicotine is a molecule the human body doesn't produce, and it's going to get its claws in you. It's going to be very hard to quit. Only 3 to 5% of people are going to be successful at this, which is why packaging of things like this is benign or neutropic are so sinister. So that I think is the best protocol. Taper first. Use other things in place. Crunchy foods. They make pouches that don't actually contain nicotine. They make pouches that contain caffeine or other mint flavors to give you a burning sensation in your mouth. You want to drink more water during your quitting phase. You want to try and exercise as much as you can to take your mind off this and do something good for your body and get as much sleep as you can and improve the quality of your diet. So, that's probably the best protocol. There is no magic way to get off these things, unfortunately. And like I said, they're

[27:33] really going to get their claws deep in you. So, hope this video has been helpful. I think it would be inaccurate to say that nicotine is making a huge comeback right now because nicotine is just shifting. And now tobacco companies have figured out that this is the product people are going to go to. So, it's a a dangerous time, guys. So, stay strong out there. If you're using nicotine, do your best to quit. Those of you that have been successful quitting nicotine, please put in the comments down below how you've been successful at doing this. help other people out and I will see you guys in the next
