TITLE: How To Shop For Meat And Eggs At Costco
VIDEO ID: mXRxFtQiT3I
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mXRxFtQiT3I
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-05-22
DURATION: 19:18
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] I'm here at Costco. In this video, I'm going to show you how to shop for meat, one of my favorite things. I'm going to show you how to shop for chicken. There's definitely a type of chicken in here that I would not buy. I'm going to show you how to shop for red meat, so beef. They've got some decent meat in here and some that's not such a good deal. I'm also going to show you how to shop for fish. And guess what? There's fish in here that I would buy and fish in here that I wouldn't. I'm going to make it all clear for you. And then at the end as a bonus, I'll show you which are the best eggs to get at Costco. All right, guys. Come on, let's go. Costco knows what they are doing here, guys. Look at this. $1.50 for a 1/4 lb plus all-beef hot dog. Wow. This is the type of meat you don't want to buy at Costco. Don't fall for it. Let's go actually find some decent meat to buy here. All right, guys. Let's start with chicken. Let me show you how I think about chicken at Costco. There's organic chicken and non-organic chicken. So, organic chicken, what does that mean? It means the chickens are fed organic grains. All of the chicken here is fed grains. None of this chicken is wild chicken. None of this chicken is roaming and packing in the land. None of

[01:01] this chicken is eating bugs and worms. These are all on chicken farms. Okay, whatever. That's fine. It's pretty much the reality of mainstream factory farm chicken. Organic chicken is fed organic grains, but what I don't like about most of the organic chicken here is that you can see on the label it says up to 4% or 5% or 6% water retained from the chilling process. What does that mean? When a chicken is killed, it has to be sterilized and chilled. And in order to do that, they have to put it in a water bath. You can also air chill the chicken. That is probably a better thing. But all the organic chicken at Costco is water-chilled. And so, up to 4% of the chicken is water. The water baths these chickens are placed in contain chlorine, potentially contain antibiotics, contain things that you don't necessarily want to be eating in your chicken. So, chicken for me is a toss-up at Costco. I don't want to eat chicken like that. If I'm going to eat chicken, which happens very rarely, but it does happen from time to time, I'm

[02:01] going to eat air-chilled chicken. What's cool or interesting about Costco is they actually sell air-chilled chicken. It's just not the organic chicken. So, let me show you the air-chilled chicken here at Costco. Again, this one fed grains with no pesticides. The other chicken is fed grains potentially with pesticides. It's a little bit of a toss-up, but in this case, I would probably lean toward the air-chilled chicken over the regular water-chilled chicken cuz I don't want the chlorine and the other byproducts in the water in my chicken when I'm eating it. Okay, so here guys, you can see boneless, skinless chicken thighs, air-chilled. That's the difference. The air-chilled is interesting. It means it's air-chilled. It's not in that water bath with chlorine, with peracetic acid, with other organic acids in the chicken. So, what's the balance? Maybe some more pesticides on the grains, less chlorine and other chemicals in the water bath. Uh I don't know. I'd probably just get the air-chilled chicken, but it's a toss-up. There's no great option for chicken at Costco. If you could find

[03:03] organic air-chilled chicken, that's probably the best you could do. So, think about that. But you see here, look, chicken thighs, air-chilled, right next to chicken thighs fresh, not air-chilled. So, you can see that it's The labeling here matters, and you can get regular chicken thighs, which are not air-chilled, which are going to have that water bath, the chlorine, the peracetic acid, the other compounds in the water, or you can get the air-chilled ones, and it's labeled there. So, that's going to be a better option in my opinion for chicken at Costco. There's something kind of crazy over here at Costco I got to show you. I don't know about you, I didn't know chickens had paws. I think they just want to call them claws cuz nobody wants to eat chicken claws, but you can buy chicken paws at Costco. These may look gross. I mean, you can see the little nails on the chicken paws. You could get these at Costco, which is actually kind of cool. Put them in a broth, put them in water with a little bit of vinegar maybe, or salt in a crock-pot or a pressure cooker, and you can make your own chicken bone broth, a high collagen

[04:05] food. So, let's thumbs up, chicken paws up. Thumbs up for chicken paws. That's kind of cool. Let me show you guys another type of chicken I would not get at Costco. The season rotisserie chicken. In case this wasn't obvious, you probably don't want to eat a chicken that's getting roasted and sitting hot. This is actually hot to my touch in a plastic bag. First problem. I'm not even looking at the ingredients. What's in this bag? Surely there are PFAs or BPA plasticizers that are going straight into the chicken. And before you guys roll your eyes, I think the accumulation of these plasticizers is a major problem for humans. And limiting these plastics, plastic exposure, I think this is one of the most important things you can do for your fertility and hormonal health. That's the health of your testicles or ovaries, depending if you're a man or a woman, long term. So, do not take this lightly. Let's look at the ingredients real quick on this rotisserie chicken. Sodium phosphate, modified food starch, potato dextrin, that's just a type of sugar,

[05:07] essentially a starch. Carrageenan is on here. That's one of my least favorite ingredients. It is a sulfated polysaccharide derived from red algae, then sugar, dextrose, obviously just more sugar. You got cooked garlic pepper seasoned party wings. For all the same reasons I'm not a fan. It's sitting in plastic in the heat. But look guys, this is a black plastic here. Why is that a problem? Because black plastic we know is made from electronics. Not only is this plastic with plasticizers, BPA, PFAs, forever chemicals, this can have metals and other chemical components of electronics that can leach into your food. So, I would never buy something packaged in black plastic and definitely not something packaged in black plastic under the heat. That's a horrible idea. Let's go talk about some beef and I'll show you what I like in terms of the beef here at Costco. So, if you're trying to bulk, you got to get at least 1 g of protein per pound of body weight. How much do you weigh? >> Like I don't know. I I feel like he's 150, 140.

[06:07] >> 140, 150? So, you want to get at least 150 g of protein per day. How much is this? >> Uh that's like >> $7.29 a pound. Let's see what else is over there real quick. >> Yeah. >> There might be something uh this is actually beef cube steak. It's not ground beef. >> Oh. >> Yeah. This is not good. >> He had ground beef with them, but it was like bad. Like it didn't look >> This this is This is a beef cube steak. It's a very lean steak. Um these are obviously more expensive because you've got top sirloin. This is uh $13 a pound. But, let me show you over there. I think there's some ground beef that'll be more affordable than this. >> Yeah. >> Okay? >> Can you show us? >> Yeah, yeah, let's see. Come on over here. And you got to get rid of these bagels. You got grass-fed ground beef. Do you know what that means? >> what I usually get. >> Okay. That's fed grass its whole life. Probably going to be a little more nutritious, right? This is $6.44 a pound, right? And this is 85% lean. Over here, you've got the regular ground beef. This is just sort of like the run-of-the-mill, whatever. It's going to

[07:09] be 88% lean, 12% fat. So, it's a little higher protein. It's a little higher protein, but not much. And it's $5.99 a pound. So, your question is is it worth 45 cents a pound for something that's grass-fed >> Yeah. >> and it's probably better quality? Is it worth it to save 45 cents a pound for probably the lowest quality beef? Up to you. If you're really pinching pennies, here you go. If I would say for me, this is worth it. For 45 cents, it's worth it because there's only three, you You it's like this is four bucks. >> It's it's it's going to the cow is fed better than that cow. So, you can get that's the cheapest way you can do it. This is probably worth it. It's only 45 cents more. So, there you go, guys. I mean, I got to show some folks in Costco how it works. But, yeah, in terms of the most affordable beef at Costco, they do have a grass-fed ground beef. It's 85% lean. You can save 45 cents a pound and get like the run-of-the-mill basically super cheap ground beef, but I don't think it's worth it. So, I would skip

[08:09] this ground beef. It's fed grains, which you're going to have more contamination with pesticides, and I would get the grass-fed ground beef, which is going to be fed grass its whole life. It's going to have more nutrients. So, why are you eating meat in the first place? You're eating it for protein, but you're also eating it for vitamins and minerals, and you want less pesticides and less toxins and more of the good stuff. So, I think your grass-fed ground beef here, $6.45 a pound, is a pretty good deal at Costco. So, with the Wagyu ground beef, you're going to lose a lot of fat when you cook it. All the fat is going to get cooked out. You're not going to get as much for your dollar because the fat is getting cooked out. There's not as much protein per pound in this. There's more fat. I think in terms of ground beef, 85/15 is the sweet spot. That tastes good. If you go too lean, if you go 95/5, 93/7, to me, that tastes just dry. I don't like ground beef that's that dry. You need some fat in your ground beef if you want a good burger. I think 85/15 is a sweet spot. This over here says it's 88/12. I have trouble believing that. It looks a little a little different color. I mean, you guys can even see it. Look at the

[09:09] color difference between those two meats. This meat looks more red to me than this meat. This meat looks more pale. And usually the paleness of the meat is from the fat because the fat is white, but this meat says it's leaner than this meat. This meat has less fat, according to the label. So, this meat is either mislabeled and has more fat or this meat is darker because the meat is richer in nutrients, and I would say it's probably both. This meat is probably richer in nutrients. It's a higher quality beef. So, if we're looking at steaks, you got a couple different options. Generally, the bigger piece of meat you buy, the more affordable it's going to be. So, this is a big piece of ribeye. It's a primal. You'd have to cut the steaks this way. But, this is not cheap. This is $330 for 22 lb of ribeye because it's $15 a pound. So, we just went from $6.45 for ground beef to $15 a pound. That's like a 2 and 1/2 X cost difference for a steak. But, sometimes you need a steak. So, for $15 a pound, you can get a prime

[10:11] ribeye. Over there, you can get a choice ribeye for $13.99 a pound. So, there's a dollar difference in cost per pound with prime versus choice. What does that mean? It's just a grading system that the USDA puts on meat. A prime steak is a higher quality steak because of the marbling and the way the steak looks primarily. They're probably going to taste about the same. The prime steak might taste better because it's more fatty. It has more marbling. But, they're basically the same steak. Cows raised prime, cows that are graded choice, they're all fed grains at the end of their life. There's no real difference probably in the nutritional quality of the meat. It's just how marbled it is. As you guys know, I'm not a huge fan of grain finished beef in general. It's not the end of the world. It's still nutritious for humans. Eating some meat is better than eating no meat. Don't let perfect be the enemy of good. But, when I can, I would prefer a grass-fed steak to a grain-fed steak or a grain-finished steak like these

[11:12] ribeyes. You can see how white the fat is. That's what happens when you get a grain-finished steak. You guys have heard me talk about ribeyes a lot. You might think ribeye is my favorite steak. It's not. This is my favorite steak. And again, they don't have any grass-fed steaks. But, if you guys haven't tried a flap steak. This says beef loin flap steak, USDA choice. It has granularity, the texture is good. I find rib eyes to be too fatty sometimes and I don't like the texture of rib eyes. This meat, I think is amazing. The other meat that I like is a skirt steak. They don't often have skirt steaks at Costco. If you guys find this video valuable, please give it a like. Hit So, fish can be confusing because you see things like this. You see Atlantic salmon and it says farm raised, but a lot of times you might not see farm raised on Atlantic salmon, but I'm here to tell you all Atlantic salmon is farm raised. There's no wild Atlantic salmon. This is $12.79 a pound, so fish is expensive, guys.

[12:14] It's not cheap. And if you look at the ingredients on farm raised salmon, you will see that it is more than just salmon. It always has coloring. Farm raised, product of Norway, color added through feed, raised without antibiotics. At least it's raised without antibiotics, but farm raised salmon we know, consistently from the studies, is higher in chemical contaminants. Things like PCBs, polychlorinated biphenyl compounds, they're not good for humans. They're endocrine disrupting, potentially linked to cancer. I don't want farm raised salmon ever, so be careful with Atlantic salmon. It says farm raised, avoid that. What's better than that? A wild salmon. And a wild salmon is going to say on it wild salmon. It's not going to be Atlantic salmon. It's over here. It says wild sockeye salmon. There's no coloring. What's interesting to me is this is $13.99 a pound. This is $12.79 a pound, so it's about a dollar more, a dollar and 20 cents more per pound to get wild versus farm raised. I think that's completely worth it. So, you can

[13:14] see the color of these is completely different. The wild salmon is much darker, but check this out. We're not done yet. If they did not add color in the feed, this farm raised salmon would be the color of this Atlantic cod. So, this salmon would be that color if they did not add color to the feed. That's what farm-raised salmon looks like. It's going to be white, but they have to add the color in the feed so that it looks like a wild salmon, which gets this color from the algae and the zooplankton that it's eating in the ocean. So, this actually has color from what it's eating, and it has much more astaxanthin and other pigments that are good for humans. What other fish? This is a wild Atlantic cod fillet. Yeah, cod is super high in protein. It's very lean. I'm not a huge fan of cod, but if you like lean fish, that could be great. But, in terms of salmon, which is the main fish here, be careful with the farm-raised salmon. They've got some tuna over here. Let me show you this. So, this is ahi tuna.

[14:14] This is what they make poke bowls out of. This is the prized thing in sushi bars. This is $17 a pound. It's much more expensive. What you probably don't know about ahi tuna is that I don't know how fresh this is, but most ahi tuna, it cuz it's so expensive and it's so precious, is treated with carbon monoxide. They do the same thing to meat now, guys, to keep the meat red, to make it look fresh longer. This is a tricky thing about buying ahi tuna in places like Costco. I don't know if they would tell me, but this this tuna has likely been treated with carbon monoxide in large factories to keep it looking red like this. If you don't do this with carbon monoxide, which is going to bind to the myoglobin, it's going to turn brown, and that doesn't look good. So, I don't know about you, but I don't want red meat like beef or ahi tuna preserved with carbon monoxide. So, I would be very careful about buying ahi tuna. I would not buy this here. I don't think it's going to be good enough quality, and tuna is also sky-high in mercury. So, I promised you at the end of this video I was going to talk about eggs at Costco because

[15:15] steak and eggs, that's how we do it. I got to say from the outset, the eggs at Costco are a little bit disappointing. They don't have any of my favorite type of eggs here. What do they have? They've got the basic eggs here, cage-free eggs. They're very affordable. You can get $8.39 for five dozen eggs. So, they've got very affordable eggs. What does cage-free mean? Cage-free means cage-free. They're still in a warehouse. These chickens are shoulder to shoulder in a warehouse, crammed in. They never see daylight. They're stepping on each other. They're pecking at each other. Cage-free, it sounds humane? It's completely inhumane. And these chickens are just fed grains all the time. So, cage-free eggs, cage-free is a total scam. Over here, you've got organic free-range eggs. And you can get 24 organic free-range eggs for $7.69. Not bad at all. But free-range is not the ideal. Free-range means they get to go outside, but they only get a small amount of land, like the amount of a size of piece

[16:17] of paper per chicken. They're still pretty crowded. But at least they're outside. They're getting vitamin D. Do chickens need vitamin D? I think so. I bet they're still eating grains. They might get an occasional bug or a worm. And they're organic, so they're fed organic grains. That's about the best you can do at Costco is organic free-range. And look, I get it. Like, you can save a lot of money when you shop here. So, this is not the worst option. But understand cage-free is a total scam. Organic means they're fed organic grains. They're free-range. At least they're outside a little bit. What would be ideal? Organic pasture-raised. Pasture-raised is what you want. When it says pasture-raised, legally, every chicken has to have 108 square feet of room to roam. So, pasture-raised eggs are going to be a from healthier chickens than free-range eggs. Over here, you've got heirloom fresh free-range eggs. They're kind of blue-looking. It looks cool. I think this is just kind of a marketing thing, guys. Some chickens lay brown eggs. some

[17:17] chickens lay blue eggs, some chickens lay white eggs. The color of the egg doesn't tell you anything about how healthy the egg is at all. What does tell you how healthy the chicken or the egg is? The texture of the white. You want that white to be very viscous and mucosy. If you crack open an egg and the white of the egg is very runny and it just runs all over the place, that's not a healthy chicken. In a really healthy chicken, you can see the white of the egg is very viscous. That protein is strong and it's it's really it's stuck together. When you put eggs next to each other, you can tell the quality of the egg based on the height of the yolk. Just like you want the white of the egg to be viscous and thick and not runny, you want the yolk to be thick. You want the yolk to stand up tall. So, you can tell if you put two eggs next to each other, you can tell which is from a healthier chicken and therefore a healthier egg based on the height of the yolk when you put it flat on a plate. So, I don't know. I'd have to put these heirloom fresh eggs next to some of these other eggs on a plate to compare, but my suspicion is there's nothing

[18:19] really special about these. I bet these free-range eggs are about the same as those, but those say organic, so I'd probably go with the organic free-range eggs. Again, I would prefer organic pasture-raised. Can't always get what you want at Costco. We just you know, you just might find you get what you need. Who knows? All right, guys. So, that is my comprehensive guide for how to shop for meat at Costco. Here's a bonus for you. Recently, I did a video about Sam's Club. I'm going to give you the down low. I don't think Costco is better than Sam's. I think Sam's Club is better, guys. I'm about to get kicked out for saying that in here. What did Sam's Club have that Costco didn't? Sam's Club had grass-fed steaks. Sam's Club had organic pasture-raised eggs. And the prices at Sam's Club were a little bit lower. So, if I had a choice, I would go to Sam's Club before I would come to Costco. You got the dirt from me. I think Sam's Club is better than Costco. You're welcome. I will see you guys in the next video.
