TITLE: The Caffeine Plot Twist (over 400 mg was healthier than 0 mg!?)
VIDEO ID: OjrtoO5JQp4
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OjrtoO5JQp4
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-02-06
DURATION: 18:50
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] A lot of people don't really think of stimulants as brain supporting, but there's been a lot of emerging literature on coffee. I think I you were actually the one who tweeted the study about how like upwards of the equivalent of like 500 to 600 milligrams of caffeine I think from coffee was I think showed a greater benefit of health than like the equivalent of 200 to 300 milligrams of I don't remember the exact caffeine amount. you can speak to it, but it was uh pretty surprising for like a lot of people think, oh, if he passes 400 millig threshold of caffeine equals bad. >> Um I think what a lot of people don't realize is that recommendation is based on a body weight multiplier of somebody who was like under 150, an average of like 150 lbs, I think. But that's neither here nor there. But as far as that coffee literature that you presented, um I would love to hear just what it showed in terms of benefits attributes and like trying to

[01:01] disentangle. Is it the caffeine or is it the other stuff from the coffee? It does seem as though there is a bit of a dose response like going up to like three even four cups of coffee a day. You have a stronger effect like you're having more more benefit from um from drinking the coffee. >> And notably the best or the highest yield of benefit in that study was a group drinking more than what would otherwise be the highest recommended dose by the FDA if I recall correctly. >> Yeah. I mean, so you know, people that are drinking three or four cups, four cups of coffee a day, I think that's a little bit higher, even up to five cups, actually. >> What what would be a typical cup of coffee? >> So, it it's it's a it's a loaded question because it depends on >> so many factors, right? Like if you're making it at home, if you're going to Starbucks, if you're getting espresso, I mean, it could be anywhere between 200 milligrams to like 400 milligrams. Like, it really does depend a lot on

[02:01] >> where you're getting your source, right? Like >> some some beans like Robusta beans have more caffeine. Some people make very strong coffee. Starbucks makes very strong coffee. A lot of people go to Starbucks to get their coffee. By the way, how crazy is it that you don't have to state on the Starbucks anything how much caffeine it is? Like you in energy drinks it's like super specific. Here's the exact milligram amount and you have to be like plus minus like 10%. But in coffee, it's like the variability is I don't know if I saw it from you or somebody else, but there was like a study where the even going to the same Starbucks on different days, it was the uh shift of like hundreds of milligrams of caffeine. >> Totally. I mean, and that's why some of these studies and the same goes with like when I read the alcohol literature, I'm like, what's a standard drink? >> Like it's how much alcohol is in a beer versus like a glass of wine, right? It's it there's so much variation there and so you kind of have to take it with a grain of salt because at the end of the day these studies refer to a cup of coffee often. Um you'll sometimes get studies looking at milligrams especially

[03:03] if they're doing if it's not coffee but they're actually doing like caffeine just caffeine. >> And so you know it's kind of hard to go well okay four cups well how many like how much caffeine is that? Like you know what I mean? So it it is a little there is a little bit of wiggle room here where you kind of have to interpret like the caffeine amount. Now you're asking about caffeine versus like decaf, right? And that is something that has been looked at. So these polyphenols like the chlorogenic acids, they have benefits, you know, in and of themselves. And I will say like if we're looking at all cause mortality and we're looking at cardiovascular mortality, it does seem that both decaffeinated and caffeinated coffee have similar benefits. I would say the caffeine may be a little bit more robust. And in fact, if we go a step further and we look at what I would say more biological age, you know, so there have been studies, some some large studies that have looked at people drinking coffee. Now, they didn't separate decaf from this, so we it's definitely, you know, caffeinated

[04:03] coffee. And we look at what's called their their epigenetic aging clocks without going into too much detail here. um they're just essentially looking at patterns of what are called methylation groups that are kind of sitting on top of different regions of their DNA. And these patterns kind of shift with age and like based on that shifting pattern, researchers can kind of gauge a biological age there that might not be necessarily the same as their chronological age. And um what's really important here is that large data sets are necessary to be accurate with this type of data. We're not talking about a one person doing a test on themselves. We're talking about you're looking at a signal to noise ratio. You need large sample number. You need large data sets to actually be more accurate with this kind of agent clock data. Which is why I'm not super bullish on doing agent clocks myself. But anyways, that's a whole other >> kind of works. Um yes, I have. But like let me let me continue on before before going off on that tangent. Um coffee

[05:06] does shift the aging clocks by a few weeks. So, it's not much, but it's something. And um and so that's also very interesting. Is it the caffeine or is it the polyphenols? Probably both. But it's definitely clear in multiple studies that that is the case. On top of that, coffee drinkers, so there's this this is now a randomized control trial I'm talking about in people that were given a robusta coffee. This is caffeinated coffee. And I don't remember how long of a time they were given. Was it a week or two weeks or four weeks? I can't remember. But they were given it for a period of time up to a month. And um what was measured what in their blood cells was called DNA damage. And it was spec a specific type of DNA damage called double stranded breaks. That's the kind of damage that first of all leads to encogenic mutations that cause cancer. It's the most delterious type of damage you can get to your DNA. So your DNA is double stranded. A double stranded break means a break in each DNA strand. So your your repair systems have

[06:07] to repair both of those brakes and not mess up while they're doing that. And often times it messes up. Everything's not perfect, right? If it introduces an error that could be in a part of a gene that could lead to cancer. So it's all random chance here like oh it's in some gene it's in a part doesn't really matter but it could be in a gene that is involved in cell growth or you know something like that and then it would matter right. So double stranded brakes lead to cancer but they also accelerate the aging process as well and they play a role in epigenetic aging. So so double stranded brakes can accelerate the epigenetic aging process that biological clocks I was just talking about. So people that drank robustaic coffee lowered their double stranded brakes by 23% compared to just drinking like water which is pretty robust. So that's kind of cool right? Again it was like caffeinated coffee. It wasn't decaf. Was it just could it have been decaf? We don't know because that experiment wasn't done. Um the other thing is is I would say type two diabetes is a big

[07:07] one. Like that is something that coffee is known to be beneficial for. And you might be going, "Wait a minute, but I've read studies where coffee will acutely raise your blood glucose levels." And in fact, I've measured that in myself wearing my CGM. Yes, you will get an acute raise in your blood glucose levels from coffee. you're getting sympathetic activation. But over the long term, it's actually beneficial. Both caffeine and the polyphenols in coffee, the chlorogenic acids activate kynise, this master regulator um this sort of metabolic sensor that is activating all sorts of, you know, energy pathways. So, it's it's responsible for shifting towards um using fatty acids as energy versus glucose. um you know glucose instead of being stored as triglycerides seems to be going you know into beneficial places like the muscle and so long-term studies show that coffee is actually beneficial for metabolic health. So that's also interesting. I would say the biggest difference

[08:07] between caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee comes to the brain. And that obviously makes sense if we're talking about a neutropic effect, if we're talking about performance enhancement, right? So I mean, is there anything that's been more studied than caffeine in terms of improving cognitive performance? >> I mean, no, probably not. Yeah. So, I mean, so many studies out there showing it decreases processing time, so you're quicker. um attention, focus, alertness, all those things are improved, right? It's improving cognition. There's no doubt. Um so that's that's no question compared to decaffeinated coffee. The real surprise for me was the effect on neurodeenerative disease risk was also really dependent on caffeine. >> That surprised me because I was thinking the polyphenols were what's going to be responsible for preventing ner degenerative disease. And it seems as though caffeine is the the big driver here, which is super interesting, right? >> Yeah. >> So, it seems as though caffeine is the

[09:07] big driver. Um, when it comes to there's different types of neurogenerative disease. When it comes to Parkinson's disease, you know, Parkinson's disease is you're losing dopamine producing neurons. So, dopamineergic neurons in a certain part of the brain called the substantia negra. And um that affects motor control. It affects motivation, mood, right? Right? I mean, dopamine plays a role in that as well, right? The the willingness to act on something that's part of the the dopamine system. And so, um, what's really interesting is that the adenosine receptors is a key role in this here in this Parkinson's story because people that drink caffeinated coffee can reduce their Parkinson's disease risk by up to 60%. Which is huge for me because Parkinson's disease is runs in my family. my dad my dad has Parkinson's disease so I'm very very concerned about preventing Parkinson's disease and um caffeinated coffee seems to be the way to go versus

[10:08] decaf and uh I think that does come down to the the basically the blocking of the adenosine receptors um the constant activation of adenosine receptors is got some kind of inhibitory signaling that plays a role in Parkinson's disease and like a certain part of the brain. So, it seems as though that's something that you don't really want like you want to. And my dad never drank coffee, by the way. I mean, I know it's just a N of one, but it does seem like the caffeine is really important there for preventing Parkinson's. Also, Alzheimer's disease as well. You will find some studies where decaf coffee seems to be beneficial, but it's way more robust if you add the caffeine. So, I think it's like clear night and day. Like if you're wanting neurodeenerative protective effects, if you're obviously wanting cognitive enhancement, improving your performance, caffeinated coffee is the way to go. If you're also wanting longevity benefits, caffeinated coffee is the way to go. So, is caffeinated coffee bad for you? No. And you know, for a long time there was like this um

[11:10] there was like this this idea that coffee was actually even potentially causing cancer. Have do you remember that like the acryumide? So the roasting of coffee beans causes the production of acryumide which is a carcinogen. >> Doesn't surprise me that somebody would have said that. >> Yeah. So it was classified it was actually classified as a probable carcinogen. It turns out not only is it not a probable carcinogen, it's actually lowering cancer risk and a variety of very common cancers like liver cancer. So again, we're we're kind of back to this like more data comes out and we realize no, even though there was the amounts of acryumide in coffee were so minuscule that it wasn't didn't matter at all. Yeah. >> What do you speculate is the mechanism by which I guess not necessarily broadly stimulants because obviously there's a net point where you cause like neuron death if you have too much dopamine neurotransmission and whatnot but like presumably there's some sort of like stimulatory effect in the brain that is maybe offsetting the neurodeeneration aspect or >> Right. Yeah. And I it's not really

[12:11] known. I'm I I'm super curious about what that is and I've looked and it's it's really not really known that why the caffeine is protective seems to be protective against neurogenerative disease and if you think about like you know nicotine does something similar in fact with Parkinson's as well in particular there is some kind of overlap with that nicotine caffeine sort of stimulation right like there's some there's some overlap there and that's why I'm really intrigued because there's something to this story that hasn't been figured out >> yeah But we're seeing it now in not only large data sets. We're seeing it replicated, but we're seeing it with other types of stimulants, right? And I'm not at all promoting nicotine, by the way. Um I'm just saying because there's obviously some trade-off can be some trade-offs perhaps with certainly with smoking and perhaps even with just nicotine. We don't really know. But um yeah, so there's some kind of there's some kind of mechanism that needs to be I would say uncovered to kind of understand why this stimulation seems to seems to be beneficial for protecting

[13:13] against neurogenerative disease and particularly Parkinson seems to be a strong one when it comes to these two types of both caffeine and nicotine. Hm. I wonder if that's because it's more dopamine related and it's kind of like >> I think it is >> the dopamine neurotransmission component is like heavily part of the mechanism. >> It is. I do. I think you know that. So there are studies showing that when you um when you inhibit the adenosine to receptors these adenosine receptors it it increases dopamine receptor activity. >> So there's like it's like a feedback almost too. >> Yeah. >> For whatever reason. >> Why that is I don't exactly know. Maybe a neuroscientist could explain that better but um the phenomena is there and it's observable right so the the question is like why but yeah and again that that adenosine signaling is kind of like there's some sort of inhibitory signaling there as well >> I found the caffeine study by the way it segregated groups into caffeine intake caffeine intakes by milligrams per day

[14:14] so it wasn't just coffees per day it was less than 100 milligrams 100 to 200 200 to 300, 300 to 400 and then greater than 400. And the uh drinking three cups a day or consuming 200 to 300 milligrams, I guess there's an equation there, was linked to the lowest risk of developing cardiometabolic multi-orbidity compared to those who drank little or no coffee/caffeine. Those with moderate caffeine intake, 200 to 300 migs per day, had the 40.7% lower risk of developing multiple cardioabolic diseases over time. And of note that, this is something I wrote cuz I think I made a video at some point too because I found it so interesting. Those who drank uh three cups of coffee had 48.1% lower risk than non- coffee drinkers. So there's a delta of 7.4% 4% between the moderate group of coffee and the moderate caffeine intake group. So there was a group that was just caffeine versus caffeine from coffee at that same

[15:16] equated milligram amount. And then the craziest takeaway was remarkably compared to those who had very little or no caffeine, the participants consuming greater than equal 400 milligrams per day had 40.2% lower risk of developing multiple cardioabolic diseases over time. And that risk reduction was greater than the risk reduction in the high consumption coffee or tea groups alone. So it was like pretty close to the risk reduction in those consuming 200 to 300 milligrams per day of straight caffeine in the groups that were having 400 or higher. So it was like pretty much if you're a high coffee consumer with exception of like very intense drinkers like you're probably okay pending blood pressure and everything is like in check and you're not impeding your sleep by having it too close to bedtime. Is that like a reasonable takeaway? >> Yeah, I think um I I I think that's a reasonable takeaway. I mean we're talking about four cups or so. I mean,

[16:20] >> well, I guess it's just more like the the milligram amount, too, because it also segregated by like straight intake via not necessarily coffee, >> right? I would I will say this. Um, so there's a few things to say. For one, you talked about blood pressure. And another very interesting finding that I came across when doing a deep dive on this was um people that were consuming caffeinated coffee actually had benefits on reducing arhythmia versus people doing decaf which is the complete opposite of what you would think or hypothesize or even hear prescript prescriptive. Right? So so people think that caffeinated coffee causes arrhythmia. In fact it was the caffeinated coffee that was decreasing arhythmia risk. uh decaf coffee did not do that at all. Very interesting. Um I will say this, I do think there's a limit. So there have been studies at least looking at neurodeenerative disease risk like Alzheimer's disease risk and coffee consumption and when people started to get up to like eight cups a day, they were actually in they were like doubling their risk of

[17:20] Alzheimer's disease. >> Yeah, there's got to be a limit for sure. >> So So it's not like there's not an upper limit. I just want to make sure that that is clear to people where they're like, "Yes, I can just go for it." You know, um I mean you can take caffeine can definitely is toxic. So um that's something to consider as well. >> Yeah. I think one of the tough things about these caffeine studies often when they're establishing like safety parameters is it's based on like body weight measurements per milligram per kilogram. So then it'll be like some recommendation for a 225 pound guy who's you know maybe a fast caffeine metabolizer and you know has the capacity to like handle it is stuck using less than 400 because he thinks he's at like elevated risk of like a heart attack with certainty because of some guideline written around like an 150 pound female or something like that's it's weird because it's like some stuff does get scaled and it does get

[18:21] like re I don't know the the information becomes repositioned appropriately like even with you know creatine recently like you've had you know people understanding that you might need the body weight of a human and the muscle mass that you can actually saturate might equate to a different outcome in terms of how much you can utilize like you would think that's common sense but with caffeine we're still basing it around like everyone has 400 and that's it don't go above it or else you get messed up but probably not the Yes, sir.
