TITLE: Clavicular and Paul Saladino FULL Live Stream
VIDEO ID: r4XBZSvBm2c
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4XBZSvBm2c
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-07-29
DURATION: 228:41
CAPTION TRACK: whisper-local (turbo)
======================================================================

[00:00] Roll. I'm going to just have posted on posts that we're going live. Usually they let us film in here. We'll see. Sometimes they get a little freaky, but we'll try. I think we'll make it at least for a little bit. Yeah. Yeah. I know a lot of the folks in here. I've done stuff in here too. You kind of just need to be like, look, like we're only filming ourselves. We're not looking to go fuck with any guests or anything. And then that's all you had to say. That's what I said at dinner last night. Cause people in Brickle are usually kind of obnoxious with the streams and like want to fuck around with people. I was just like, I'm just sitting eating dinner. Like camera's not going to go on any guests. Yeah. That's all you had to say. They were okay with that. Yeah. Um, let's see, do a post real quick on Instagram story. And, um, yeah, this banner was pretty funny. What's that? The banner I liked. It was solid. That was rad.

[01:00] What's your, uh, your app? Is it carnivore MD? Paul Saladino MD. Oh, that's right. Oh. Oh. It's S-A-L-A-D-I-N-O. Yeah. It used to be carnivore MD. Yeah. That's why I was like, I couldn't fucking find it. We like changed it. Cause not carnivore anymore. Yeah. Cause a big stir. It's also good. It's good. It's good for branding. You know, if it's your name rather than just like carnivore. You know? Yeah. I thought I was going to be carnivore forever and then, you know, life humbles you. Uh, I mean, it's all good. I think that's like very like mature though. If you're able to kind of realize, put the ego aside and realize like you're wrong. Like, uh, that happens to me all the time. Like I'll correct, you know, my past opinions a lot cause I, I don't care. I mean, it's a lot better than just continuing, uh, to double down on your lie. What was the last thing that you changed your mind about? Last thing I changed my mind about. Um, it's always super interesting.

[02:02] I would say I was like kind of a low fat extremist. Yeah. But like, I'm more so like moderate about it because of like, you know, sexual dysfunction. Yeah. It's pretty bad for your brain to eat no fat. Yeah. So I'm like a hundred grams at least. Yeah. Yeah. I think you can feel it for me when I go too low fat, you feel it immediately. Your hormones, I think tank immediately. You'll get shredded, but you'll just, your hormones will go down. Well, I think it's a little less, um, significant for me cause I use TRT. Um, but no, you can certainly still, still feel it. Like just mentally you feel a little bit more foggy. Yeah. Um, so yeah, it certainly was, was about the fat. When you went to a hundred grams of fat or more a day, we can talk about it more in the store. Yep. Did you notice your body composition change at all? Like negatively or? Yeah. Really? Yeah. You got less lean at a hundred grams. Um, yeah, definitely. Really? Because fat doesn't really contribute to any, uh, significant growth pathway for me since

[03:03] I'm, uh, using steroids, but, um, you know, only carbohydrates and protein do, right? You have your MTOR and, um, M U R myofibrile protein synthesis. None of that's really affected too much by fat. So if I'm just like eating a lot of fucking carbs, pre-workout and sufficient protein, uh, that, that's really all I need to make gains. Interesting. It's more so just for quality of life about the fat. It is quality of life. Cause I don't really notice unless I do super high fat, I don't notice that I get less lean. Yeah. But I think it's important. It's important. Like if you go too low fat, it doesn't work. What body fat percentage are you? Probably 10, 11. Okay. So shredded. Yeah. Pretty. I mean like pretty, like, I don't know, 10, 11 right now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Very lean. Yeah. Okay. Wow. Yeah. I wish I was still 20, dude. Well, do you take any, uh, well, honestly it's, uh, it is what it is. It's got its pros and cons. Still can't go into bars and stuff.

[04:04] But, um, do you take any hair loss medications or no? No. Wow. Okay. Are you against all that kind of stuff? Like bar mode? Uh, some of it, man. I think the side effects are interesting. You gotta be careful. It's tricky. Like, I mean the DHT stuff is interesting to me. Yeah. It's like, it's such an important androgen. Why? I don't, I don't want to block it systemically, but I think it's tricky. I think losing your hair is also not great either. So I think I've got genetics that allow me to keep my hair. Yeah. But what do you like, what about DHT really? Do you mean? Well, like, you know, minoxidil for instance, right? If you block systemic DHT synthesis, is that going to have, I guess minoxidil doesn't, but like, um, um, Dutasteride. Dutasteride. Yeah. Like if you do that, what are you going to, what are you going to do to your body long-term by blocking the DHT? And then there's long-term, long-term finasteride and Dutasteride like syndromes in some people. So that's just kind of scares me. My whole thing is like with the twin studies, the only real thing, even like developmentally,

[05:07] is just, um, the penile growth, uh, from DHT, like the one twin who's deficient had a micro-penis and the one twin who didn't, oh, and the vocal cords as well. Yeah. But besides that, after you're already finished with development, then I just don't see a necessity for it. And I, my whole thing is like, even if my dick stopped working and fell off entirely, I'd rather that happened than lose my hair. Really? What? Yeah. Dude, I mean like, think about it. No way. You're going to be sexist anyway if you're bald. There are so many guys who are bald that look reasonably good. Cope. No, no, it's a, you'll, you'll be sexist regardless. So there's no point in having a dick if you're bald in my opinion. Do you, um, do you have genetics for like hair loss? What is your mom's dad? Um, yeah, there, there's a whole hereditary thing. Mom's dad still has a full head of hair at like 75. Um, so I think I'll, I'll be okay, but regardless, I've been taking my, my Dutt since I was 18. Yeah. So I'm on Dutt and Minox.

[06:08] Yeah. I just do like a red light hat. Have you seen those? Yeah. I've seen the red light, uh, masks and I know they have those as well. They have the hat caps too. Yeah. Yeah. And it's like, you know, it's red light, it's infrared. It's supposedly there's some evidence for that. Like my hairline is still pretty good at 49, but you know, it's great. Yeah. Yeah. Your density is good too. That's the other thing. Like some people are still Norwood zero or Norwood one, but their density is just so comical that like, you know, there's bald spots and it's patchy everywhere, but it's pretty solid overall. It's tricky. But I mean, Kelly Slater, dude, that guy's a legend. Yeah. But I mean, not everyone that's going to be fucking best surfer in the world. Yeah, exactly. Fair. Yeah. It's tricky. It's like, Oh, you know, you could be good looking and bald. Look at, um, you know, Jason Statham or whatever. Yeah. He's a good friend of mine. It's like, well, you're not, you're not him. Not Jason Statham. Yeah. Not Jason Statham. Yeah. For the average guy, you're going to need to be on the, on the dot for sure. That's tricky. That's a tough call, man. It's a tough call. But let's like my androgens.

[07:08] Yeah. I mean, you're the, you're the diet expert, um, for sure. So let's see, like, uh, what should I, I basically have nothing in my fridge. So what should I stock up? When was the last time you were in a grocery store, dude? Uh, dude, it's been at least like, you know, I mean, outside of streaming, just going for a second, a long time. When was the last time you shopped for your own groceries? Probably never. Probably never. But you're never. Yeah. But you are, you're starting to think about food more now. You told me. Yeah. You're starting to get healthier. Yeah. Cause like you said a couple of months ago when you were streaming all the time, you were just fast food all the time. And now you're starting to think about food. Yeah. So this is good. We're turning over a new leaf. I've been eating a lot more steak, a lot more eggs and like whole foods. Great. Yeah. Great. I just need to find like a, some better carbohydrate sources. Okay. And like pre-workout I'll usually just have like bagels or some shit. Okay. We can talk about that. We can talk about that. Let's start with the meat. Okay. Let's go get some meat.

[08:08] Yeah. Hey, let's go. So let's go get some meat. Let's go get some meat. Talking about dicks falling off and the task. Right. Okay. So what do you, do you have like stuff to cook at your house? Do you have pans? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We have a, not, not exactly your favorite cast iron. I have Teflon pans. No you don't. Yes I do. All right. I should have brought you other, other pans. Well, cause it's like brutal to cook. It like sticks to the fucking pan and it's all disgusting. I don't know. I know. I know. Do you have a grill? Um, I have a grill like out of my unit, like downstairs you could go, but no, I just can. We'll make do with what we got. We'll make do with what we got. So, you know, meat, you know how it goes here. I'm a huge fan of red meat. Mainstream news, as you know, will tell you, this is going to kill you. Heart disease, cancer, diabetes, shorter life. I think it's all baloney, right? There's so much good evidence for unique nutrients and red meat. I think from what you're doing, I think you felt this too. And I think the people that are watching your streams, like one of the messages that I try to get across most of my content is do not fear meat, do not fear animal foods,

[09:11] and especially do not fear red meat. You know? And so I don't think everybody needs to eat only red meat. I used to be carnivore. All I ate all day was meat and fat. And now I eat some carbohydrates. We'll talk about which. But I think for a lot of people, eating red meat is going to increase hormones, libido, mental clarity, so many unique nutrients in here. And I mean, if you don't want to spend a ton of money, I mean, look, steaks are expensive. You just start with ground beef. So I know how much you love burgers. Yeah, but I also have a, I do online gambling, so we could afford the steaks. Okay. I'll go with the steaks. But you know, if people are looking for more affordable options, like ground beef is amazing. And people might see my stuff and think like, I'm only going to eat the most expensive stuff. Look, like any red meat is better than no red meat. I like a grass fed red meat more than a conventional red meat because at the end of a conventional cow's life, it's fed grains. Those grains can be contaminated with pesticides or other toxins like mold.

[10:11] But any red meat is better than no red meat. For real. Yeah, I would say that like you would agree with this, but I usually say dial in on just the total macros and the actual food itself. Then you could worry about like, you know, whether or not it's organic or grass fed. Yes. That's the last thing you worry about. So in terms of protein and tell me if you agree with this or what your sense is. I'm trying to get 0.8 grams of protein per pound of body weight. Right. Around there. 0.81 is an overshoot for most people. If you're taking enhancement, if you're on testosterone or you want to use something stronger androgen, you might do more than one gram. But for most people, if you're going to get a gram or 0.8 grams of protein per pound of cold body weight, you're going to be good. Yep. So this is one of my favorite cuts, sirloin flap. I just love the way it tastes. It has a great texture. A lot of people like ribeyes. I am mostly going with New York's. I think ribeyes are just a bit too fatty. Yeah, they can be. New York's, this dry aged steak right here looks pretty good.

[11:12] New York, sirloin flap. We'll get one of those. I'll cook it for you. Or this one, a grass fed organic sirloin flap. That's probably amazing. Should we get a bunch of each? Yeah, let's get some of each. Okay, let's do it. Yeah, so do you not believe in like LDL cholesterol being harmful at all or just that meat isn't going to be that much of a contributor? So I think LDL cholesterol conversation is very contextual. Yeah. It's very contextual. And when I look at the research, it has everything to do with how insulin sensitive you are. Right. And so what I tell people is, know your fasting insulin. So when you go to a doctor and if they're not checking your fasting insulin and your thyroid and interpreting your lipid panel, your LDL cholesterol in the context of your thyroid, your fasting insulin, they're missing the whole picture. There's a lot of studies that show that LDL cholesterol doesn't have the same association with heart disease when you're insulin sensitive as it does when you're insulin resistant. Right. It's like, look, if there's a fire going on in your arteries, yeah, LDL can get pulled there

[12:16] and cause a plaque. Yeah. But if your arteries are healthy, if you're insulin sensitive, LDL is part of this sort of hormonal cascade and it's this molecule that carries cholesterol. Right. Yeah. It's a balloon, right? So it's a balloon. It's a single lipid bilayer. It's a single lipid layer that carries cholesterol and triglycerides to your body. So those are the precursors for your hormones. You know, LDL moves things to your testicles and your brain and it moves triglycerides in your body. It's moving things to cells that are essential for cellular repair. LDL is crucial for human health. Yeah. My LDL and HDL are kind of out of whack just from like tests and orals. Um, so I was always too concerned with like, if I were to do two pounds of steak every day and you know, all this extra cholesterol from foods, it might be too much in the long run. It's a special case, right? Do you know your fasting insulin? No. We could think about it or we could check it and circle back.

[13:16] We should probably check it. Yeah. We could check it and circle back because you really want to be metabolically healthy. So for most people, I think if people are not doing tests, if you're not doing oral steroids, then you know, check your fasting insulin. My fasting insulin, I eat a lot of meat. I eat a lot of carbohydrates. I eat a lot of honey. It's 2.5. It's like less than three all the time. Micro IU per ml. Super insulin sensitive. Every time I check, I just checked my hormones and my insulin. It was 2.5. That's very low. Very low. So I think at that level, like you're just metabolically healthy and LDL is not the major concern. Yeah. I mean, the major concern with insulin is it makes you like a bloated buffoon. Like right after you eat carbs, the insulin uptake. Yeah. So that's why I like before going out, you know, if I see people like snacking on like french fries, like that's brutal sodium and like the carbs too. It's just, you're going to be the Michelin man in the club. And they're cooked in seed oils, which is a whole nother thing.

[14:16] Well, that's probably like the one thing that's the least concern. I think it's a big concern actually because you got the seed oils are all heated. So when you take the seed oils and you keep them like that and you deep fry, it creates these, these aldehydes like acrolein. And those are definitely linked with cancers or they're probably triggering inflammation and all sorts of issues in humans. So especially cooked, heated fats, like heated seed oils, big problem. That's, that's a problem for humans. All right, let's get a, let's do it. Um, so let's go with like, I'm going to get like five of these ones and like five of these ones, I guess. Yeah. Might as well like do some actual shopping while I'm fucking doing this. Yeah, man, you'll have these in your fridge. Yeah. Um, so let's do it. Hi there. How are you? How are you? Can we get five of the dry aged, uh, New York strips? Hog. My favorite thing is when you used to do the videos, like going up to people who are like

[15:21] shopping for lettuce and then you start like going through the different like plant defense chemicals. You're like oxalates. That was a, that was old school, Paul. Yeah. That was pretty low end. It was, it was, it was pretty uh, like imagine you're just like a normie in Walmart and then like someone start like criticizing the, yeah. Rating your cart. It's kind of a, it's a lot for people these days. That's perfect. Thank you. It's especially funny cause they have no idea what any of it means. No, I think for most people, it's not the biggest issue. Like you said, I think let's fix the macros, you know, and improve food quality overall. But for some people oxalates are an issue. I mean, they're, they're the major precursor for kidney stones, you know, calcium oxalate kidney stones and joint pain, other issues. I mean, it's, it's no joke for some people. It's probably a genetic thing in general, but. I had some issues because of like electrolyte imbalances. I wasn't hydrating properly. Like, but now I'm solid.

[16:21] What made you want to get healthier? Cause how did you go from live stream Burger King all the time to like thinking about this? Um, well, honestly, I just went over to Europe and like the, yeah, you were just over there, right? Yeah. The fast food was so bad. The American fast food that I was like, fuck it. Like I'm just going to eat the local food. And it was pretty ideal. I mean, I've always liked steak, but my whole thing was like, it was just, you know, a couple of the things that I was like, I'm just, you know, a convenience thing. I was inconvenient as shit for me to, um, you know, try to have someone cook. But now I have people that work for me that cook and all that kind of stuff. So I'm able to get away with it. Thank you so much. Amazing. Thank you so much. Thank you. All right. Let's see. We're going to get these, but you can help her. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think for some people, um, the cooking is a, is a hassle. Yeah. But it's man, what a good, I mean, it's what a good ROI. Like spending your time investing in high quality food. It's like you said it earlier before we started streaming, like you feel better.

[17:22] Just from the macro, it's not really the food quality. So like what I'm actually eating to hit that total macronutrient count, that almost has the least effect in my opinion, whether I get protein from, uh, you know, a burger from Burger King or what we're about to eat. We're about to eat. I'll perceive no difference. Really? Yeah. See, I think food quality is a huge lever. Oh, I disagree. I mean, I, I just don't perceive any difference. You don't perceive any difference when you eat a burger from Burger King with the bun with the bun has like 45 ingredients, right? With it versus if I were to give you a steak with fruit or a steak with like steamed potatoes and butter, no difference. No. Not in terms of irritability or the next time you're hungry, anything. No. My main like, you know, irritability thing would just be like whether my dopamine receptors are properly saturated or not. Uh huh. Uh huh. So that would, that would kind of be what it comes down to.

[18:22] So do you think if you didn't eat the Burger King, your dopamine receptors wouldn't be saturated and you'd be craving it? I just meant in terms of like stimulants. Oh, overall. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. So, um, that, that'd be more so what it comes down to. Cause you don't stim, right? Or do you? No. No. You do no pharma drugs or what? No pharma drugs. Okay. Wow. No pharma drugs. I remember like being kind of like impressed by your energy levels. Um, you know, when you were talking that whole time during the Santa Cruz thing. Yeah. Can I get, can we get three of the grass fed beef sirloin? I was like, I was like mad. I was like, this motherfucker's definitely on Ritalin or something. Sorry. Three of them. Yeah. No, I think, um, people see me sometimes and they're like, that guy's on something. Yeah. Definitely not. Yeah. So it's me. I'm not on any stems right now. Not even caffeine. Um, so I've been tapering back on like my SIM usage, especially like the pharma ones, like Adderall and stuff. I used to take like 30 mg a day of Adderall, like at the max.

[19:25] And now I will do like either zero or like 10. Okay. Something like that. So it's not as bad. Do you do caffeine? You're not only caffeine now. Do you do caffeine any days? I do caffeine before I work out. Okay. Yeah. I'll usually take like one of the pre-workout things. Uh, gave me a lot of issues combining that with stimulants, like with my kidneys. Yeah. You know, so that's kind of why I was like, fuck, I need more hydration and more electrolytes. I don't do any caffeine at all. I just don't like the roller coaster. Yeah. I mean, right now for me, caffeine is not something that's a huge lever. Like I'll, I'll probably be able to take like 400 mg and sleep right after. Really? I could never do that. Yeah. I mean like, uh, back in the day I was able to sleep like right after, during the peak of like meth. So. Are you still doing meth? No. Are you, and you're not doing any other amphetamines? I guess just Ritalin. Uh, yeah, I use Adderall. It's like from time to time, but, um, yeah, I have a prescription for it. So I don't use anything like that I'm not prescribed. Have you been on that your whole life?

[20:26] Adderall? No, actually. I started taking stimulants when I was, uh, like 19. Okay. Like summer of 2025. Uh huh. Thank you so much. Thank you. I've never taken Adderall until I'm pretty sure March, 2025. Okay. So quite recent. What do you notice with them? What stimulants? Yeah. I actually like become a lot less social. Yeah. Um, and I just want to be like working on my computer all day, not talking to anyone. Right. Right. I think I have issues with my serotonin. Uh huh. Um, because I noticed from like when I use, uh, cocaine, which is like, you know, a dopamine reuptake inhibitor, right. And it's like very serotonergic. I'm like a lot more sociable and happy versus like, if I just take like a dopamine release, like a modafinil or, um, amphetamine, whatever, I don't really want to do anything but work. And that feels good or bad. You want to get that locked in to work or you don't like being that antisocial?

[21:26] That's ideal. But I mean, like from, if like in a streaming context, like if I were to be on amphetamines right now, I would just be like, I want to fucking like, you know, do, do all these different responsibilities. I wouldn't really be talking as much. Uh huh. So it's a, it's a problem. But with serotonin and if I take like a MAOI, I don't know if you know about those. Yeah. Uh, it helps a lot, you know, um, with your social ability. Yeah. Even like an SSRI. Like I've used those like not for enough time to really perceive a difference, but it's helpful. Yeah. A lot of you will feel like SSRIs are going to flatten them out, but you feel like it helps you be more social. Yeah. A little bit. Huh. In general, are you more of like a loner or do you like interacting with people? Loner. I have to like kind of, uh, you know, block certain like excitatory neurotransmitters, like, uh, my glutamate for example, which is like extremely high, um, with pregabalin a lot of the times to stream, you know, or I just won't be able to really like do anything.

[22:28] Really? Yeah. Hmm. Okay. Right now it's not like a super stimulating like environment or if I'm just like, uh, you know, regular daytime streams, I don't need it. But nightlife certainly when there's like a lot happening or busy club. Yeah. Yeah. I imagine there's a lot happening around you in the clubs. Yeah, for sure. So, um, that's just different than your usual environment, bro. Yeah. This is a lot more, a lot more chill. This is super chill. Lighting's not very good, but it's super chill. I know. Um, but yeah, so that, that's kind of what it comes down to. So I, I'm wondering like how I can like maximize my serotonin. Cause I think that's like, I've been doing some experimenting, talking to different friends of mine and it seems like that's kind of like what's been identified. Have you tried like tryptophan or precursors, 5-HTP, none of that stuff? Um, no, never, never tried any of that. How's your sleep? Sleep is ideal. Really? That's the one thing that's dialed in. Yeah. I always get at least seven hours of sleep every day, usually eight. So that surprises me, but that's great.

[23:28] Really? Well, I mean, from the outside, your life looks a little crazy, bro. Well, it is crazy, but like, you know, some days I won't get to bed till five, six in the morning, but the next day I'm sleeping in and my sleep schedule perfectly adjusts. I can stay up till five. And then the next night I go to bed at nine or 10, just fine. No problem. That's being 20 years old. I think you think so. I don't need to be consistent with it at all. Fortunately, because the research would show that the inconsistency is not healthy at all. No, the circadian rhythm is very important. I agree. Um, you know, it's just with my job, it's, you're up and down all the time. Yeah. I don't plan to have that until I'm 40 years old. Yeah. Usually streamers, you get like a good, like five year run. Yeah. Yeah. Who knows what I've noticed as I've gotten older as a 49 year old is that I think that I still feel pretty good in all aspects of my life. Mental clarity, libido, body composition, energy. And I walk more of a tightrope. You know, I think that when I was your age, when I was in college, the tightrope is much wider, right?

[24:31] Yeah. You have more variability this way of like, oh, I can stay up later. I can do this. I don't feel it as much. What I feel now is that as I've gotten older, and I think this is probably human physiology, just I walk a thinner tightrope. I still feel good overall. But if I mess around with like my circadian rhythm or my food, I feel so much more. Yeah. That's hard. No, I certainly would assume that that's true. You know? Do you do dairy? No, I don't do dairy because I'm on Selegilene. Uh-huh. MSAM. Okay. So just like the way it metabolizes kind of like, it's not, it's a recipe for disaster. Okay. With MSAM. Let's skip it. Yeah. We'll go. What about, do you do eggs? Eggs, I like eggs. I suck eggs. I have at least a dozen eggs a day. Okay. What? Yeah. How do you eat your eggs? Uh, scrambled. Okay. Scrambled, plain, easy. I don't do any of this shit. No like protein powder copes, you know? Okay. Yeah. I think, uh, real meat is better, you know?

[25:33] Absolutely. In a pinch, I could see it, you know, the protein powder, but if you make too much of your diet that, not great, but you know. Just like makes you shit yourself. Depending on the protein powder. The bad ones do. Yeah. The bad ones do. There's some good ones. So, um. Do you know how to navigate eggs? Do you, do you, do you, do you think about this at all? So, uh, you want me to like rank them from like worst quality to? Yeah. What do you think is the best here? So the worst, oh, the best, uh, would, would be the pasture raised. Yeah. He's on it. Um, then probably the, the organic. This one's organic pasture raised. That one's probably even better. Oh, so, okay. And then free range is like the tier below pasture, right? Yes. Your free range is a tier below pasture. Okay. And then, um, what else do we have? Basically, if it doesn't say free range, you don't even want to eat it. This one says outdoor access, which is probably like free range. Outdoor access. It's like prison. Yes. You get one hour. Yes. Well, that's what free range is like. Free range is like prison. They get to go outside and I think they have the amount of square footage is a piece of

[26:33] paper per chicken. Brutal. When you get pasture raised, you get a hundred and eight square feet per chicken. So like legally any chicken that is a pasture raised egg producer has to have more space outside and they actually have to go outside. Free range. I have no idea. Would you rather be a free range chicken or a prisoner in El Salvador? Probably a free range chicken, bro. I don't know. I feel like there's definitely an argument there. Yeah. I mean, the El Salvadorian prison sound pretty intense to me. Um, so we actually did a video and I bought like 10 different types of eggs from this exact Whole Foods and we ranked them. And these vital farms were actually some of the best eggs. I have no affiliation with them. Like they taste good. They taste good. And you can look at an egg. If you want to get really egg nerdy, you can look at the height of the yolk of an egg. And you can look at how thick the white of an egg is. So if you crack this egg and you compare it to like this egg, the white of the egg of the lower quality egg will be much more runny.

[27:33] Let's do that. Yeah, we can. Let's get both of them. We can get both and we can compare. We can show people. We can actually get like a bunch of these, but dude, imagine like being a normie, right? And then you have to pay $11 for a fucking dozen eggs. Like that's fucking brutal. It's tough. It's tough. I mean, I think eggs are a good, um, a good investment. I mean, that's a lot of nutrition in the egg. And again, a lot of cholesterol in eggs, but this cholesterol in the eggs doesn't really raise your serum cholesterol much only in a short, small amount of people. And it's not that big a deal. Super healthy. And you think about what else is in an egg, choline, vitamin A, riboflavin, folate. And then in the, in the white, you've got more riboflavin, high quality protein. Have you- There's certain nootropics that you need to take your, your choline, uh, you know, for the alpha GPC and stuff. With the folate or the choline? The choline. Yeah. Yeah. Choline is, is a precursor for phosphatidylcholine and all of the like cell membranes, uh, neurotransmitters, acetylcholine.

[28:33] That's what alpha GPC is. It's a type of choline that's helping you make neurotransmitters for your brain. Yeah. Do you do like a lot of research into like those nootropics? Cause I know you don't use like some acts. I don't use any of them. So I don't do a lot of research into it. Yeah. I'm more interested in like, how do I use this to feel as good as possible? And then what really gets me curious is why do humans get sick in the first place? And that's where I think food quality comes into the conversation in a big, big way. Cause I think that longterm, the lack of food quality is, that's what I believe strongly is that low food quality is what causes chronic disease longterm. Yeah. You know, like it catches up with us. Yeah. My whole thing was, um, I was never really super longevity oriented. No, I was like, fuck man. Like I have to send, uh, and then I'll worry about it. Cause like, you know, why would you want to be a subhuman for a long period of time? But now you've got a great life and all the people watching you. Well now I'm, yeah, I'm like shifting the focus a little bit. I love it dude. So you're thinking about longevity a little more.

[29:33] Yeah. But if I was an incel, I'd, I'd want a longevity man. You know what I mean? Like, but just stop being an incel, you know? Well that's, yeah, that's what I'm saying. Yes. Yeah. You have to ascend and then like figure it out. It's brutal. It's brutal. Yes. It's brutal. So these are, I like these. These, uh, potatoes are great for a lot of people, man. Um, or these, the Yukon golds are really good too. Whatever you like. You say it's the baby potatoes. Yeah. Yeah. What I'll do with potatoes, um, sometimes I experiment with potatoes. I didn't think I could eat potatoes for a long time. When I was on a carnivore diet, I didn't eat anything but meat, like I said, and eggs. But recently I've done a few experiments with potatoes. And so my previous hesitation with potatoes were that the skin has some oxalates and then the skin of the potatoes, if you find a potato with an eye, you know what I'm talking about? Like an eye on a potato. Yes. The eyes of potatoes actually do have alkaloids that can be problematic for humans and cause headaches and stuff. So if you see those little eyes on a potato, you just got to get rid of those. You got to skin them. So if you skin the potato and you get rid of the eyes, it's a little bit of that right

[30:35] there. You can kind of see like a little bit of the eyes on the potato. Those are like sprouts. If you get rid of those things on a potato and you boil it, it's most people can handle potatoes pretty well. Okay. It's a great carbohydrate for a lot of people. It's very filling. They've done studies looking at satiety indices of food. So how much they gave people, I think it was a hundred gram portion of 35 different foods, give or take. I'll find you the study. Boiled potatoes were the most satiating food in the whole study. Okay. So that's incredible. Like if you're looking for a food that keeps you full longer, boiled potatoes are amazing. Steak was also high and you can imagine things like cookies and donuts. Very low. Yeah. Sugary carbs. Sugary carbohydrates. They're just quick digesting. So I always would prefer those before I was working out, but they cause a lot of issues like with, you know, that huge spike with IGF-1, like with acne and stuff. Yes. And I think the sugary carbohydrates are problematic at the level of your gut. Yeah. And this is really interesting.

[31:35] Like when you eat this carbohydrate, right, you've got amylose and amylopectin in here. You've got some starches that will get broken down into just pure glucose. But there's so many other phytochemicals in here that it doesn't really cause an overgrowth of the bad bacteria in your gut. We're getting a little technical, but it doesn't cause dysbiosis. It doesn't cause dysbiosis. You're super smart. You're into this stuff. It doesn't cause dysbiosis. So my thinking is that when you eat pure table sugar, so sucrose, this disaccharide of glucose and fructose, you're basically feeding all the bad bugs and there's nothing in there to prevent overgrowth. But when you have fruit, you have hundreds if not thousands of phytochemicals or this. And those phytochemicals, the polyphenols, one of the things they do is actually stop the overgrowth of the bad bacteria in your gut. It's pretty interesting. Okay. Wow. So fruit doesn't cause dysbiosis in the gut. Fruit doesn't cause the same negative effects in humans that sugar does. Obviously, you have to eat it sort of in the context of your life, how active you are, all these kind of things. But fruit is super healthy for humans too.

[32:35] Okay. Do you eat fruit? I should. Let's get you some. We should get some fruit. So we'll get some of these potatoes too. What about almond milk? Brutal? I guess almond milk isn't the worst thing in the world if it's just almonds and water. It's just like low calorie. So just something to drink because like, you know, just regular water without any flavor into it. You know, it's just like, I know I'm not going to spam it as hard. It's hard. The thing about almond milk is some almond milks have seed oils. We may disagree on what you think about seed oils, but I'm not a fan of seed oils. Yeah. So I would avoid that. I like regular milk, but if regular milk for some people, the whey can trigger acne and other issues. So if regular milk is an issue for you, choose an almond milk that is just almonds and water. Just avoid the carrageenan. So that's the other thing I have with the plant milks is the thickeners, the emulsifiers like carrageenan or mono and diglycerides. There was a 2024 study that came out. Obviously it's observational, but it actually showed increases in multiple cancers.

[33:37] I think it was breast and overall cancers with carrageenan and mono and diglycerides. So carrageenan is a breakdown product of algae and it's a long polysaccharide that probably is damaging for the gut. And you find it in thickening agents. It's probably in some of these dressings and you find it in a lot of the... I don't use any seasonings. Yeah. It's in a lot of like the milks and stuff. So we can go look at almond milk real quick too. Skip the seasoning aisle. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. It's complicated. There's a lot of seed oils and stuff in here. Let's go. Let's go look at these real quick. We'll leave that there. All right. Let's do it. What do you like? Just regular. I don't like vanilla. Let's see what we got. The ingredient list, we have filtered water, organic almonds, pure organic vanilla extract, and we have some Himalayan pink salt. So do you think this one is... Pretty good. Yeah. Let's try it out. Why not? Yeah, it's pretty good. And you see here, they even say no carrageenan. Perfect. So you want to watch out for that. No binders, no gluten and stuff. So most people do okay.

[34:38] Let's find one with. Yeah. There's definitely going to be some in here with. Okay. This one has a lot more bullshit in it. It's got some gums in it. Yeah. Sunflower lectin. We have potassium citrate. I know you're not a fan of that, right? I like to keep it as simple as possible. Right. The rule that I have is like anything... When I look at a label, anything that my great grandmother wouldn't recognize, I'm not eating this. This one has Jalan gum, calcium carbonate, which is basically chalk, natural flavors. It's better than artificial flavors, but you have no idea what that is. More potassium citrate, sunflower lecithin, vitamin A, vitamin D, vitamin E. I think you need to try this, Oatly. That's the one. Some of these actually have the seed oils in them. So this is the one. So they say it right there. Low erucic acid rapeseed oil. That's basically canola oil. Rapeseed oil because it rapes your body. I guess, yeah. It's the rape plant. And do you know the history of that?

[35:38] Like Canada came up with an acronym. So canola means Canadian Oil Low Acid. Canola is Canadian Oil Low Acid. And the low acid they're talking about is this erucic acid. So erucic acid is a monounsaturated fat that in animal studies, they've never done this in humans because it's not ethical, is associated with cardiomyopathy. So there's a monounsaturated fat in rapeseed oil that causes cardiomyopathy, which is weakening or ballooning of the heart in animals. And we made it into an oil that humans eat every day. Wow. That's not good. It's not good. I mean, it's a low erucic acid rapeseed oil. They had to make it a low erucic acid to even sell it. But if you get regular erucic acid. So it's unethical to do a study, but it's allowed to be in the... It's allowed to be in the... Yeah. An Oatly. I feel like that's just like kind of good that it's there. It's a natural selection thing. You don't want the people who are picking up the Oatly to really last too long. Oh man. I'd rather them just eat some healthier stuff.

[36:38] Like just go over there to the real milk if you can handle it. If you can handle it. If you can handle it. We got some almond milk. We'll skip the tofu here. Okay. I used to be a vegan. Did you know that? Yeah, I did. I did know that. Yeah. So that's like... And then you went to... You graduated and got your MD from University of Arizona. Yeah. Were you vegan at that time or was that when you were coming out of... I was out of it at that point. So I was in Flagstaff, Arizona. Yep. Before I went to medical school, I was a physician assistant in cardiology. Okay. My dad is a doctor and I saw my dad's life and I thought, man, I don't ever want to be a doctor. His life looks horrible. And then I went to PA school, physician assistant thinking it was going to be a happy medium. And I didn't have enough autonomy. I was just not doing enough. Yeah. Like a gesture. So back to medical school. But the intention was always, it's like, how do I help people actually get healthy? You know? Like what's causing people to be sick? That was what I was so fascinated by. I went to medical school in Arizona and then I did my residency in Seattle at the University

[37:39] of Washington. And I was a vegan when I was in Flagstaff for about seven or eight months. I lost probably 25 pounds of muscle mass. Real. I was so skinny. So skinny. Like I look at pictures and this was like back in the Facebook days. It was, it's scary to look at myself. Yeah. Wow. The reason you'll appreciate this. The reason that I stopped being vegan was because I asked a girl out on a date and she said she didn't want to. The movie theater, right? And then you were like, um, brutally, uh, gassing up the place, right? She didn't, that, that was a problem too. Yes. But I asked the girl on a date and she didn't want to go out with me because I was too skinny. Oh yeah. And I remember you, uh, I think you talked about the other thing too, right? Yes. When I was a vegan, I had horrible gas. Yep. Horrible gas. And this was months and months and months into being a vegan. And it's just anywhere I went, I just couldn't be inside. I couldn't even be in here with you right now. I definitely couldn't be in a car. Yeah. Or a movie theater or I worked in an office and the people that I shared the office with

[38:42] like. They hated you. Yes. They hated me. It was brutal. Brutal. So there's like a, you know, there's like a happy medium there. So let's go look at some fruit. But I, I feel so much better now. It's like when you figure out what your body wants and you know, it's much easier to like not fart all the time. Do you like apples? I do. Do you have a favorite apple? I would say probably green apples. Yeah. Uh, that's probably the one I would go with. Okay. We'll get you some green apples. Liking green apples is a trait associated with like a sociopathy. I think you got it. Red apples are your best. Oh, fuck. What happened? That's not good. No. Called out. We're going to get these two. Cosmic crisp are my favorite. Okay. I'll get whatever man. Yeah. We'll get you some green apples. You actually think that, is that just your personal opinion? I'm just joking with you. I just hate green apples. I think, I think you're going to like these cosmic crisp apples. These are awesome. Okay. Let's do it. So the thing about fruit is convenient, right?

[39:42] Yep. Before I came over to hang out with you, I was in the ocean and we were filming some stuff and I just ran back to my condo and I grabbed some apples and I grabbed some steak and I just ate an apple or two in the car and they're just, you know, fruit is convenient. So like I said earlier, I think fruit is super healthy for humans. There's so many good studies showing that whether it's apple juice or cherry juice, orange juice, grape juice, orange juice. I like, yeah, I like that. Yeah. Fresh squeezed orange juice whenever I get the chance. Oh, I'll definitely, uh, mango juice. Let's see if we could find some. I really like that kind of stuff. But like all those juices improve endothelial function. So the lining of our blood vessels is called the endothelium. You know this? Yep. So they improve endothelial function. They actually decrease LDL oxidation. They decrease DNA damage. Do you have an orange juicer? No, I don't. We'll get you one. Okay. These are, these are awesome. Um, so I'll get like a big bag of Valencia oranges and you can just get a hand juicer or a, uh, a big bag.

[40:43] Yeah. And this is like, this is, uh, probably like two glasses of orange juice. Okay. Yeah. You make a lot of, you make a lot of, it takes a lot of oranges to make juice, but it's worth it. It's really high quality, but orange juice is super good for humans. I like mango juice too. It's great for a juice. Yeah. Mango is good. I don't know. Can we find any like organic stuff that's pre-made? Probably not. What about a hundred percent juice? Let's see the ingredient list. Wait, just orange juice. Just orange juice. That's great. Okay. So let's go with one of these or two of these. Maybe, uh, one of these or wait, fuck. Let's go to the big one. Yeah. It's the same. Um, it's just orange juice. Yep. Just orange juice. And you can see, I mean, it's going to separate. So you've got the juice and the pulp and you shake it up. Um, ideally if you're fully optimizing, I would try and minimize the plastic, but we'll get to there. What about a, like a screwdriver, like orange juice and vodka?

[41:43] What about it? I thought you weren't drinking right now. I mean, not right now, but that's what we're here for, right? What do you mean? That's to get the mixers. No, that's not where I get the mixers. Oh, my bad. This is juice, bro. I don't drink at all, man. I'm pretty, pretty straight edge. That's good. That's good stuff. I don't like alcohol. No, drinking is like the ultimate evil. Uh, I'm pretty anti, uh, liquor. I mean, I'm very conscious. Like every single time I take a sip of alcohol that it's like raping my body. I don't like alcohol. No, drinking is like the ultimate evil. Uh, I'm pretty anti, uh, liquor. I mean, I'm very conscious. Um, you know, and completely fucking neurotoxic. Super neurotoxic. Like having that in the back of my head at all times, like keeps my consumption very low. I would say I don't drink more than like once every two weeks. And like when I do, it's like, you know, maybe three shots, like six ounces max. I mean, I think it's like, it's a balance, right? You got to live your life. Life is meant to be enjoyed. And I think you hit the nail on the head. The studies now would suggest that like any amount of alcohol is immediately negative. Yeah.

[42:43] There's no healthy amount of alcohol, but you got to live your life. I choose not to drink at all. That's just me. But like, I think even small amounts of alcohol have been shown to thin the gray matter of the brain. So like thinning the cortex of the brain. So that's not great, but you know, live your life. And especially the fact that usually kids start drinking, uh, and like freshman year of high school, that is so fucking damaging, uh, to your development. It's, it's early. It's very early. And they start doing other stuff too. Do you like coconut water? I do. I really like, that's one of my favorites actually. So we'll do this. I'll show you how to do this. So let's get a bunch of them. Yeah. You know how to open these? Uh, yeah. With a hammer and a, yeah. You take a knife and yeah, do it. These are good. Yeah. I usually like to do things in excess. So, um, we're getting six coconuts and, Oh no, we're getting more than that. I have five dozen eggs and sweet. Eight coconuts. All right. Perfect. All right. Okay.

[43:43] Um, we'll go with that. And so we got potatoes for carbohydrates. We got meat. We got eggs. We got fruit. We need some butter, right? Do you just get some butter? Do you need other sources of carbohydrates? Um, I usually like bagels, but I think you're probably anti bread, right? I'm kind of anti bread, but I mean, look, some people probably do it. Oh wait, sweet potatoes. I really liked sweet potatoes are great. Uh, sweet potato bag. Let's go with one of these. Oh, bro. What's up? I'm Paul. I hope it's helpful. How's everything? You're on the live stream, bro. Oh no way. I love that. Yeah. He's showing off, uh, you know, good shopping cart. Clive's getting healthier. So we're trying to show him. Gotta drop Burger King. What's to this guy? He's already done it, dude. Yeah, I did. I haven't been at Burger King in like two months. No way. It's crazy, right? Yeah. It's awesome to see you. Yeah. He's doing great. Can we get a photo of you guys? Yeah, let's do it real quick. I first actually, um, I think I encountered you from that one interview you did with that

[44:43] super like liberal panel. I think it's like the voice or something. The doctors? The doctor. Oh my gosh, that was gnarly. Cool. So yeah, I remember when I was like, I was like, I was like, I was like, I was like, so yeah, I remember they were. Good to meet you, brother. Thanks for saying hi. Yeah. Yeah. That was like a super nasty interview. It reminds me of some of my interviews. Like you've had some brutal ones, dude. Yeah, I know. So I was like, I definitely felt that one for sure. Yeah. Um, so I rewatched that, uh, when we started talking about doing the collab. Yeah. Just cause I was like, that was the first memory I had. It was so bad. Yeah, I know. They were just like such obnoxious, like douchebags. They sat me on the thing. Yeah. Yeah. But this guy, you know how he got me on the stage and you got me on the stage. Oh, that hit my fucking head. And you had the two girls who did the carnivore. Yes. And that actually basically reversed their lupus.

[45:45] So this is a really interesting story. The carnivore diet is super helpful for people with autoimmune disease. I think as a reset, probably not long term for a lot of people, but what a simple elimination diet. And what's interesting for me, how I got started with all this was that I got interested in how do I fix my own autoimmune disease. I had bad eczema. Bad. When I was in medical school and residency, I would get eczema on my belt line, on my elbows, on my knees. I was doing jujitsu at the time and I would get eczema that got infected on my knees and my elbows. It was horrible. And then I would come home from work. You know, I had shirts tucked in and the shirts were like saris fluid from the eczema and stuff. It was bad. And so I was like, what is doing this? And if you go to a doctor with eczema, they're going to give you steroid creams. They're going to give you medications. They're going to give you, you know, lotions, which are full of endocrine disrupting parabens. And I thought, this is my diet. Like there's gotta be something here. So carnivore was really interesting because it was super simple. Just eat meat. All right, let's see what happens. Eczema goes away in a few weeks. You know, carnivore doesn't work great for me long term because I feel better with carbohydrates,

[46:47] you know, fruit, honey, this kind of stuff. But what a cool experiment. We should get some honey. I really like honey too. Yeah, let's get some honey. Get some sweet potatoes? I got some. Oh, you got some. Okay, cool. So let's get... Let's get out of the wine aisle. We're going through the debauchery aisle. Yeah. My mom used to drink a lot of red wine during her pregnancy. So that's probably like one of the main things that I went wrong. As we know, probably not good to drink during pregnancy. Yeah. Yeah. All right. So let's see here. Um... Now, I'll tell you this. Whole Foods is not my favorite for honey. But we'll get the best they have. Butterfly shrimp. You don't do any seafood. I fucking hate seafood. I don't love seafood, dude. But seafood is great for a lot of people. Oh, we forgot butter. We should get butter. We'll get some butter. Yeah.

[47:47] Yeah. Seafood is great for people. It's just you have to worry... Think about the heavy metals. Obviously, the butterfly shrimp is breaded with low quality stuff and then deep fried in seed oils. Terrible. Not a fan. Yeah. And I remember when I worked at a restaurant, they used to only change out the oil like once every 10 days or something. Oh, God. The fryers. It's disgusting. I'm going to go to KFC. I haven't done this in a while, but I'll go into these fast food restaurants and I'll ask them, like, how often do you change? What's up, brother? What's up? How's it going? Oh, thank you. What's helpful. Let's see. What do we have? I know. I live here, dude. I live here. How's that? Because you live in Costa Rica mostly. Organic. You're a big surfer. That's awesome. I love it, man. I love it. I'm still... I know it's not the best. Nice. You know, um... I don't think you need liposomal creatine. Creatine is pretty well, it's just absorbed regularly.

[48:47] Yeah. But I love creatine. I think creatine is great. Yeah, yeah. And then you've got kinds of other stuff in here. I mean... I know. What's up, man? How are you? Nice to meet you. Simple. I mean, just regular creatine. Yeah, exactly. Nice to meet you. Thank you, man. Good to meet you. I've been following you for a while. I hope it's helpful. Thank you. Yeah. Careful out there. All right, will do. We're keeping him safe. We're getting better food. Oh, yeah. Butter. So, most people fear butter. Saturated fat. Certain saturated fats, probably palmitic acid, etc. Yeah. Probably will raise your LDL slightly. And I think they also raise your HDL. I think if you look at the cardiovascular risk profile, it doesn't raise it at all. In fact, for a lot of people, it improves it. If you look at like an LDL to HDL ratio or a triglyceride to HDL ratio, I think butter's a healthy fat for humans. It's just a calorie max. That's the problem. Yeah, yeah.

[49:47] So, think about your calories with this and be aware. What's interesting for me, and this goes back to what I was saying earlier, is that when I, I think when most people, if you improve food quality, you kind of know when you're full, you know? And if I were to eat too much butter, I would just be full for so long that my body kind of regulates the calories within reason. The problem, I think, for a lot of people is that so many of these processed foods, because of the variety of complex ingredients, are just damaging for our satiety centers in the brain. They haven't done the studies in humans because dissecting a human brain is not ethical. But in animal models, when you give an animal, like a rat or a mouse, a processed food diet, you see gliosis. You see inflammation in the hypothalamus. Okay. So, there's a little, there's something in the hypothalamus called the arcuate nucleus. It's one of the centers of satiety regulation in humans. Yeah, RETA has some good effects on the hypothalamus. For satiety. Yeah. Right. So, I think that if you, if you are eating single, like everything we have here is a single

[50:48] ingredient food, except the almond milk. And all the ingredients in the almond milk were not that bad. When you eat these foods, your body gets better at sensing satiety. And you, like, if you were to eat a bunch of butter, yeah, a lot of calories. And I think your body's going to tell you, whoa, you have plenty of calories. You're going to be full for a long time. You know, within reason. So, honey, right? Yes. We need honey. Hi there. Hi. Are we in your way? Are we in your way? Are we in your way? We're coming by you. Sorry. Yeah. And I think, I can't think of anything else. What about rice? Do you like rice? Rice is a good carbohydrate for a lot of people. White rice. You like brown rice more than white rice? No, I think brown rice is tough because it has so much more arsenic. Ah, okay. So, the thing about rice is you gotta just be aware. Do you ever do cold approaches in the grocery store? What's that? Do you ever do cold approaches? I used to, but now I'm engaged. Oh, really? Congratulations. Good stuff.

[51:48] Yeah. So, no more of that. No more of that. No, no. I'm good. Do you think this is like a good spot to do cold approaches, whole foods? If you're into health stuff, yeah, I think so. Oh, I thought you were going to say if you're Chad. Well, I mean, if you are Chad, sure. I mean, like. Yeah. If not, probably good to leave that in the back pocket. I think, you know, like, before I was engaged, before I had a girlfriend, like, I spent all my time in grocery stores and none of my time in bars. So, this would be the place for me to meet, you know, somebody that was thinking about food for sure. Yeah. Or like outside of the park. So, rice can be good. The only thing I'd say with rice is be aware of the arsenic content. Because, I mean, there was like a whole thing recently. Did you hear about this with Mountain Valley water and arsenic? Yeah. The amount of arsenic in Mountain Valley was probably 100 to 200 times lower than rice. Okay. But people got all up in arms about arsenic in Mountain Valley. A lot of rice can be 75 to 150 parts per billion in arsenic.

[52:50] It's not going to kill you if you eat rice a couple times a week, but it's probably worth checking your arsenic levels. It's the same thing as like when people talk about soy sauce all the time and then they'll go out and drink beer, which is 50 times more phytoestrogens than soy. Yeah. And strong phytoestrogens. Right. Especially the hops. Yep. Like the IPAs. I'm sure you know this. Those are the worst. And still it's, you know, whether or not it actually- Worst tasting and the worst. Yeah. They're very phytoestrogenic. Yep. It's hard to know how much of an effect on human physiology it actually has, but I used to love oats and I'm pretty sure that oats gave me multiple stress fractures. Ah. So oats are super high in phytic acid. A lot of people do fine with oats, but if you look at the way that traditional cultures prepare oats, they ferment the heck out of them. Like Norwegian cultures, oats are a single ingredient food and they are eaten by humans in an part of a healthy diet, you know, sort of schema. But I think that with a lot of the grains, we're not preparing them properly.

[53:53] Like you think about sourdough bread. The reason sourdough bread works for more people than regular bread is because the grains are fermented. You're letting the bacteria work on the gluten and kind of break down some of the phytic acid and anti-nutrients in the bread. We don't do that with oats like we should. So if people want to eat oats, this is a little bit high level, but if you want to eat oats, you really want to ferment the oats. Remember, you're going to get a lot of phytic acid. The phytic acid will rob you of other nutrients. So I'm pretty sure that I used to eat, dude, I used to buy 50 pound bags of oats. Wow. 50 pound bags of oats. They asked me at the grocery store, I was living in Flagstaff at the time and I was running at an elevation. I was like a distance runner. They asked me if I had a horse. Oh. They're like, do you have a horse? No, this is for me. A 50 pound bag of oats. And that, it caused stress fracture. So be careful with this. And again, none of this is going to kill you of just giving little pieces of information to help people if they have issues. Let's find, do you want to get some rice? Do you need some rice? Yeah. I mean, I usually like to have white rice. And so, you like olive oil because it's what, like only 16% linoleic acid?

[54:57] You're right. Yeah. Olive oil is much lower in linoleic acid. And what is like avocado? Is this like 21? It's about 14 to 16 depending on the avocado. Oh, so this is lower than- It's about the same as olive oil. Okay. I like olive oil because it's more artisanal than avocado. Yeah. If we, you know, there are studies looking at both avocado and olive and a lot of it is adulterated. Okay. It's like honey. There's a lot of adulterated honey with high fructose corn syrup. So a lot of low quality avocado or olive oil is just mixed with seed oils. It's cut with canola or sunflower. So olive oil is pretty tried and true for humans over time. If you want a liquid cooking oil or you want something on your salad, I like coconut oil too. Salad. I don't eat salad, but some people do. But I like tallow. You know, tallow is my favorite. Beef tallow. Or butter. Yep. But when you're shopping for an olive oil, this is tricky, right? You kind of need to, you want something and this may sound intense, but again, I'm just giving you and people watching information that you can choose to use or discard.

[55:58] You want an olive oil in glass. You want extra virgin. You want organic. You want the glass to be opaque and you want single source. Wow. That's how you know it's like a good quality olive oil. So you kind of have to look like, okay. No plastic. No plastic. All these grasses are all plastic. Yeah. Okay. Oh, yeah, it's cope. Let's go. So like the good olive oils are sometimes at the bottom. This is a good olive oil. I've seen this one before. It's a glass bottle. It looks fancy. It's fancy. It's opaque. And then they actually have on here 584 milligrams per liter of polyphenols, which is great because those polyphenols are probably beneficial in the gut. Let's grab it. It looks honestly pretty decorative. It's pretty good. Yeah. And you can put it on things if you want to go on top. So this is a good one. But like that's that's what you want in olive oil. And so because things like this are more expensive, I usually don't cook with this. But if you want to put it on top of something without heating it, that's probably the best use. Okay. Well, I mean, we can definitely go with this fancy olive oil.

[57:01] You know what you could do is you could just like keep the bottle and replace it with the shitty one. You know what I mean? And then make it look like, you know what you're talking about with food. One thing is, could we stop the copes on like the beef tallow on the face? Like, you know what I mean? You don't like that? What, like two or three out of five on the homogenics scale? It's, yeah. I think it's, some people get it and some people don't. People say it's like, oh, it's the same, you know, as bioidentical sebum or whatever. And it's like, well, that's not really good. What do you like on the face more than beef tallow? Do you do olive oil on the face? That's like Egyptian? No, no, I don't use, I use like prescription, or not prescription, like artificial. Okay. Like whatever skincare brands. But you think it's good? Is that what you use? I use beef tallow as part of my sunscreen. Oh, okay. So I generally don't put anything on my face. I probably could use a little more moisturizer on my face. I use a zinc on my face. That's good. Yeah, okay. So it's like, it's a mineral sunscreen that goes on top of your skin.

[58:03] I worry about the chemical sunscreens because of the, what is it? Avabenzone, oxybenzone, homosalate, octocrylene, these chemicals in there that are absorbed into the body that have hormonal disrupting properties. Okay. So like they've shown in studies that one single application of chemical sunscreen, banana boat, whatever, you see those chemicals in the blood, you excrete them in the poop and the pee and they're known endocrine disruptors. I think the mechanism is at the level of, probably at the level of end organs like testicles or ovaries for LH and FSH. So not too problematic for my case. If you're exogenously doing testosterone, maybe. Yeah. But should you ever choose to want your LH and FSH to work or should you ever have endogenous LH and FSH? Yeah. No, I think I'll be okay for a little while. So, and the other thing that I remember for, or let's go through the honey first. Yeah. Yeah. So like I said, whole foods is not my favorite for honey. I like, I like honey in glass. Manuka honey is cool, but it's super expensive.

[59:05] So you don't need to spend, it's all good. You don't need to spend, you know, $47 on Manuka honey. You can do- Only the best. Only the best. Let's get it. Wait, which one is better though? This one's kosher. Yeah. So that with Manuka honey, the way they write it is with this MGO factor. That's methylglyoxal and it has to do with like the antibacterial property. So the higher the MGO number on there, the better the honey is. This one is 150 plus. This one is 200 plus. That one is a little bit more MGO, but yeah, this one's 300 plus. So that's the stronger Manuka. Wow. And then other honeys, I look for something that's preferably organic and raw. You don't want your honey to be heated. When you heat the honey and you process it too much, it loses some of those valuable chemicals in it. But what's so interesting to me about honey, and this is where I get kind of that like, you know, stim face and get really excited about things. It's just like, when you look at honey versus sugar, a lot of people look at honey and they're like, this is pure sugar.

[60:06] Yes, it contains sugar, but it also has probably 350, 400 other chemicals that affect your gut flora and your body positively. Yeah, that's what I always say is just pure fructose. It's really not. I mean, technically it's 50, 50 fructose and glucose, right? But like when you look at studies with honey versus table sugar, honey affects the body differently. It improves inflammation. It improves insulin sensitivity. Sucrose worsens those things. It tastes good also. It tastes great. So I think honey is a great natural sweetener. We can talk about what you think about the artificial sweeteners that you want, but I prefer to have a natural sweetener like a honey or a maple syrup, which is delicious and also contains a lot of good bioactive chemicals that mitigate the negative properties of the sugar. I don't disagree with you that, you know, this is a much better than taking the artificial sweetener route, but it's just that has zero calories. Yeah. If you're trying to lean max, it's pretty productive to go with the artificial sweetener versus

[61:08] the honey. It's a tough call for me because I just don't... What, 60 calories per tablespoon or two tablespoons? Yeah. I mean, it's four calories per gram of the carbohydrates and 15 grams, 13 grams of carbohydrates per tablespoon, so something like that. But for me, it's like, I don't worry so much about the calories because I think when I think about whole foods, the calories just kind of work. You know? That's another one where I'm like, the calorie counting, you're not a pro, you know, calorie counter. I'm not a calorie counter. Then again, if I were really struggling with my leanness, I would probably calorie count and be... I have a good sense of my macros. If I wanted to lose weight, I would count calories for a long, for a little bit of time to get a sense of things and I would improve food quality and then I think you can loosen up on the calorie counting. I don't think about calories. I don't really think about calories too much either because I know pretty intuitively. Yeah. But like I'm keeping a rough estimate in my head. How many calories do you think you eat a day?

[62:10] Probably like 2,800. Yeah. I'm pretty close to that. I'm sometimes a little more like 3,000. Yeah. But I mean, I do so much cardio on days where I do like the longer IRL streams walking around 15,000 steps each day. Oh yeah. That's great. So I think it works out. I'm just so interested in how humans can do it easily and I'll keep saying this is a broken record. I, you know, the food quality, you know, the food, not red. Yeah. Red is how humans do it easily. No. No. Red is, so Reda True Tide, Reda is the antidote to processed food. Correct. So if you don't eat processed food, you don't need the Reda. If you want to eat processed food, look, it's your, everyone is sovereign. You can choose to eat it. If you don't eat processed food, you don't need Reda. Reda is an amazing antidote to processed food. I think we should talk about this after we go through the shopping cart total. Yeah. It's, um, whatever this costs, it's pretty justified for people to go with a Reda True Tide that costs a dollar a milligram versus trying to, you know, afford this in today's economy.

[63:10] Whew. Okay. We'll talk about it. Cause I think I have a nuance that I always like to talk about. I have other concerns about Reda, but we can talk about it. Yeah. Yeah. We could save that one for later. But, um, maple syrup is amazing too. I mean, we don't need to get it cause you've got your stuff, but we got honey. I think I already have some. Okay. Yeah. I already have some. Okay. So you want to get some rice? Yeah. Let's find some rice. I'll let you pick the best, the best of the worst. The best of the worst rice. Yeah. Yeah. There's a little bit there I can share. Let's see if it's over here. Chips, sports drinks. What about this? Any of these coconut waters? They're good. These are great. We got the real thing. So I mean, these are, these are good. The harmless harvest is good. It's in plastic. Again, I'm splitting hairs, but you know, so. Well, it's, it's important. Let's see. I think it might be that way. Mango organic smoothie. I might need, get me two of those. Okay. Okay.

[64:10] Circle back this way. All right. Let's see. Spice is baking, oil and vinegar, oats. We're still going to try to go to a restaurant, right? Yeah. And order healthy there. Yeah. Yeah. We'll go somewhere good. It's gotta be in here, right? Hell yeah. We're just here. So find it. So let me, let me tell you about peanut butter real quick. Do you, do you like peanut butter? No. Okay. Fucking hate peanut butter. So this is interesting. You've seen this oil on top. Yeah. So when you make this natural peanut butter, it like separates in the oil on top. And I was doing some research on this recently and found that within two to three months, this oil on top is like very rancid. The peroxide value I think was like 75 plus milli equivalents per liter. So if people want to eat peanut butter, you need to grind it yourself because this is like, peanuts are a seed. We call them a bean or a nut, but they're actually a seed. And that oil on top becomes rancid pretty quickly.

[65:12] So problematic. Yeah. Every time I used to get a jar of peanut butter, there'd be like this weird shape in the middle. Like Julio is always, I don't know what he's doing there. You know? Wait, what? Used to be like a weird shape in the middle. Jar of peanut butter was like, oh. I feel like something with the dog too, man. He was like, you know, he was gonna break the dog in a jar of peanut butter. I don't know what's happening. Oh my God. All right. We're still looking for rice. All right. Clav needs rice. I do. I mean, I have some white rice at home. It's not a big deal. Okay. We're good. I think we have a good shopping cart. All right. That's a pretty serious shopping cart, bro. Yeah. Never. I'm proud. This is great. From not going to a grocery store in months to this. Wait until you learn about shopping bag hanging. What's that? So I'll show you after we get a shopping bag. It's a legit, legit method. I'll go through some of my methods too. All right.

[66:12] You know what I'm saying? Secret, secret shopping bag hanging. Yeah, man. All right. It's some Bohemian Grove stuff. Oh, I don't know about the Bohemian Grove, man. I'm good. All right. Let's go over here. Hi there. Hello. How are you? Just okay? Just okay. Okay. Well, it's good to see you. We got some healthy food here. Oh, wow. I see that. Okay. Here's a question for you. Green apples or red apples? Which are better? Oh, she likes the green apples too. Uh-oh. I can't do it. I can't do it with green apples. Yeah, they're ideal. They're much more sour and flavorful. There we go. I don't know if you could scan just like one of these and... or no, we'll put them all up here. We'll let it go. We got a lot of stuff. Oh, I can't do it. I can't do it. Which are better? Oh, she likes the green apples too. Uh-oh. I guess... I can't do it. I can't do it with green apples. Yeah, they're ideal. They're much more sour and flavorful. There we go, I think. Then, I don't know if you could scan just like one of these and...

[67:12] or no, we'll put them all up here. We'll let her go. We got a lot of stuff. Wonderful. So we'll find a good restaurant over in Brickell. Yeah. I know some good spots there. So we have our car. I don't know if you drove. I drove. Okay. Yeah. I'll come. I'll drive or I can come with you guys or we can all go in my car or whatever. All right. Well, ideally, we would just bring you over there. Yeah, it's fine. Okay. We could drive you back at that. Yeah. All good. All right. Let me. Let's see. What do you estimate the total is going to be? We're looking at like 250, 300 here. How much do they usually give? Like food stamps is what? Like 400 a month? Maybe a little less. Okay. But what's interesting about food stamps is, you know,

[68:13] I think they did some changes. I don't really get political on this stuff, but I remember some statistic, like a huge amount of food stamp money actually went to like soda and chips and processed food. Yeah. It's pretty crazy how much people spend on that. You ever had one of these? You ever had one of these? Yeah. We'll give you that one. Have you ever had that? Yeah. They're good. Thank you. Yeah. Hello. All right. She's getting gifts. I got gifts. Oh, yeah. Hello. Laugh bought her a coconut. Let's go. He didn't even know. Yeah. Yeah. We had plenty extra, so we don't need it. We got tons of coconuts. How many calories do you think is one of those coconut waters? One or 200? I would say like, my guess is 90, 100. Oh, that's not too bad. Yeah. 90 or 100. Yeah. What do you got? I love coconut water. A lot of potassium. It's ideal.

[69:14] It's so good. So much potassium. Yep. In Costa Rica, that's all we drink are coconuts. That's the thing. I've got coconut trees in Costa Rica. We'll chop down the coconut, eat it straight off the tree. This is pretty close. I saw the video of your house in Costa Rica. It looks pretty cool. It's different. It's, yeah, very intricate design. You know, you have like the, what, the copper wire that goes all the way down to the soil. Yes, yes. I was like, dude. I'm trying to do the real grounding, man. Real grounding. Grounding is comical. And then, yeah, I mean, who knows? And then, I've got a big pool, which is ozone. And then, did you see the platform on the roof to jump off into the pool? Yeah, that looks pretty fun. Okay, we got more stuff, Julie. You don't have a bunch of chlorine in your pool? No, it's all ozone. No. We can't do chlorine in the pool. Is it, is it fine when you open your eyes in your pool? It doesn't bother your eyes at all.

[70:14] Really? Yeah. It's like, I know, like, when you do it in a regular pool, it's brutal. No, it's just like, clean water. Okay. It's clean water. And, uh, my eyes started watering even just thinking about that. Yeah. Just so you guys know, I asked Cloud, like, when was the last time you were in the ocean? And he said years. Yeah, it's literally been years. Years. Well, I mean, there's like, the sharks and stuff that's like, honestly brutal. But, I mean, you're not going to get bitten by a shark, like, you know. Amazon Prime? Amazon Prime? Uh, just, it's all good. I don't know. 421. I think it's under, it's like under my email or something, so, I don't know. I don't want to leak it. Thank you. Thank you, Julie. Have a good day. Wonderful. Yeah, we'll see you guys soon. Take care. All right, uh, I don't know where we should put that cart. You just grab it, we'll bring it out. Yeah. Let's go.

[71:17] So, shopping bag hanging. Yes. This is where you take one of the shopping bags, and this one is quite heavy. You're going to wrap it around your wrist, like so. Uh-huh. So, go for it. And now, um, I think it might be illegal to do this in public, but you would hold on, uh, to your shaft, and stretch your suspensory ligament. I thought this was what we were talking about. So, you should do, like, one hour a day, and, like, you could, uh, you could get, like, one more inch of length. So, you're stretching your, you're stretching your member. Your, uh, suspensory ligament, yeah. Oh, my God. All right. But it diminishes, uh, your erectile angle, so. Oh, man. Do we want, do we want one more inch? It's a trade-off. Do we want one more inch, or do we want a superior erectile angle? Well, it's definitely something to consider, because if you look at the anatomy of, of the vagina, right, I favor,

[72:17] it's a high erectile angle. High erectile angle. Well, if you're over the ideal, then you actually will benefit from doing the shopping bagging. So, you have to do some measurements. You have to do some math. What is the ideal erectile angle? Uh, I believe it's about 40 degrees. Really? Yeah. Okay. If I'm not mistaken. You guys know what's hilarious? What? Is I have the exact same car. Really? Mine is right there. Oh. Yeah, I don't know. I just, um, so, we'll, Julio, could you drive us? Thank you. All right, so we'll just get in the back so that we can continue the stream. All right, so we, I don't know how to do it. Fuck. Oh, yeah, we'll go in this side. I fucked up the parking. Oh. That was me. I'll go around. Let's go. Yeah, mine is, uh,

[73:18] matte black. Uh, you got it wrapped or you just bought it like that stock? What's that? You bought it? I got it wrapped. I got it wrapped. Yeah, we'll probably do that. I, uh, but you could do HDMI on the screen so you could, like, play video games or something. I don't play video games, dude. I don't either, but I'm just saying you could. I guess you could. Yeah. Or like put the chat on the screen, whatever. Yeah, it's a good, uh, oh yeah, this one has HDMI too. It sounds good. I need to get a, like a laptop in here to plug in. It's a fast car. Dude, yeah, it's brutal. I mean, for how big the car is. Yeah. Nice short version. Yeah, I used to have the Cybertruck. That was, uh, pretty fun to drive. You got rid of it? Yeah. Is that the one that, uh, is the infamous Cybertruck? Yeah. Yeah, dude, I know. It was like, uh, I probably got into like four crashes with it and it was barely even damaged. What? Yeah. Oh my God. That's crazy. Yeah. I know, man. That went pretty viral.

[74:18] Yeah, imagine that. It went pretty viral. I was surprised that you, um, remembered, uh, the, holy shit, you good? Yeah, I was good. When I first met you back in 2025, because I wasn't an influencer at the time. That was right before you started doing your stuff. Yeah. Um, and I was like trolling, smoking cigarettes. You still smoke? No, no, I don't, I never did. I just brought them for that. You were trolling me with a cigarette? Yeah, no, I don't smoke. Or you were trolling Santa Cruz? Uh, both. I, I didn't think I knew you were going to be there. I knew Santa Cruz was. That's funny. Um, yeah, so I had a mutual friend. Uh, that was at the, uh, the Talo or organic or whatever. Yeah, we were doing a meetup for lineage stuff. Yeah. How's that going? The Talo organic? Are you a part of that? No, no, it's just in, in, um, just in LA. Yeah, I was just in LA. We did a meetup there because one of my company's lineage, I brought you some lineage stuff. I'll bring it to your house.

[75:18] Sweet. Um, I know you don't do protein powders, but if you, if you mess with protein bars, it's like a super good protein bar. Super clean. What flavor? I got, I got, we got four flavors. We got chocolate, chocolate chip cookie dough, coconut macadamia, and, uh, uh, mixed berry. Okay. Yeah. I got some in my car. I can grab them if you want to try. Um, probably after lunch. You do after. Yeah. But I was there, we were doing a launch from lineage at Talo. Okay. It was crazy though. Like all those people just, I don't know, like meeting a ton of people. It's always fun, but it's exhausting. Yeah. I've been talking to people for hours and hours and there's this guy over there smoking a cigarette. And I'm like, what is this guy doing? I'm trying to, you got to stand out. I'm trying to do some work. I'm trying to like meet people here. And then you were, you wanted to do the sperm racing. Yeah. I was like, how does this work? Like I'm literally on roids. Oh, nice. Yeah. The matte black is nice. Yeah. Um, yeah. So I'm, I'm roided.

[76:19] So like I'm infertile right now. Yeah. Yeah. Wasn't there something online about a pregnancy? That was just like a poly market. A poly market? Yeah. What does that mean? A prediction market. Uh huh. Okay. Scambling. Okay. Scambling. Whoa. Whoa. No, no, no. I just, uh, this is a whole thing. Okay. I don't know how this world works. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know. No, but I, I'm not, I'm not having a kid. Okay. Not yet. Do you want to have kids eventually? Yeah. I think if, uh, like even if I were to have a kid by some miracle, like now, like if God wills it, you know what I'm saying? But, uh, I wouldn't like intentionally, like intentionally do it. Yeah. Do you have, do you have brothers and sisters? I have a younger sister. She's 16. What does she think about all this? Um, I think it would probably be like a little bit annoying for her because like all her friends are probably watching my stuff and it's like,

[77:21] I don't know, getting like outshot and would be kind of brutal. By her brother? Yeah. You guys are, I guess you're four years apart. That's kind of a big age gap. Uh, I don't know. I'd personally hate that if I had like a, uh, a popular, like older sister who was like, you know, social media influencer and people just wanted to like talk to me. Uh huh. To, to get to know her. Yeah. Something like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Where's your family based? New Jersey. Hoboken. Hoboken. Yeah. So right across the, uh, the water from, uh, do you talk to her much? Does she get that? Do her friends say like your brother are clavicular? No. Cause whenever someone like says, do you want to like FaceTime, uh, my friend or like, you know, can I call them? Say hi to them. I just, I don't do it. Uh huh. So it doesn't really matter too much. Even like her good friends who she wouldn't mind doing that for. Like I wouldn't, I wouldn't answer the phone. Yeah. Yeah. It's a different life, man. So, okay. We were, I met you in LA. Yep.

[78:21] What happened? Like from there to now, like your life is completely different, dude. I know. It's pretty crazy. What happened? Well, I mean, I wouldn't really say, yeah, I got it. I'll put, we'll go to Brickle. I'll go to like nude. You want to go to nude? Yeah. Yeah. I like that place. They have a really good hot bar. Uh, okay. Let's see. Search maps. Nude Brickle. Wait, which one is it? This one? Uh, no, not nude night. It's like a nude grocery store. Nude Miami. That's it. That's gotta be it. I think nude night is something else, bro. Yeah. Well, only one way to find out. Let's go to booby trap. Yeah. We'll see. You know what that is? No, I don't. I have an idea. That's the PR answer. I don't know. I have no idea what that is. I don't know what gold rush is. I have no idea what that is. I've never heard of it. Yeah. So from LA, I mean, the thing is,

[79:22] I kind of already was like, it was so disproportionate how many people knew who I was. Cause I had Tik TOK. I had probably like 50,000 people on Tik TOK, but at least like 20 to 30 people every single day were like asking me to take a picture, recognizing me. Um, just cause like my accounts really aren't too big, but it's just like the fact that there's so many people posting about me. So it goes everywhere. Uh huh. So it's like super disproportionate. So I was already like, you know, pretty recognizable, uh, right as I moved out of my grandma's house. So in Los Angeles. Yeah. It didn't really change too much. I would say, yeah, like the scale of it is a lot different. Now it's like, you know, obviously major media and stuff, but in terms of like people coming up to me all the time, it's not, not too different. Is it hard to live your life now? No, I don't really operate super differently than I used to.

[80:23] Really? Yeah. It's been an easy adjustment. I mean, like I'd say I'm handling it better than most people would. Yeah. But certainly weird in some aspects. Cause I mean like when I go out every once in a while, somebody says, Hey man, I like your stuff, whatever. Like it helped me when you go out, at least what I see online is it's a mixed bag. Some people are like, Hey man, what's up? And a lot of people are just, you're so controversial. I feel like it, it's interesting, man. As a 20 year old, like you got a lot on your shoulders right now. No, for sure. But I would say that it's kind of just something that is made to look a certain way. Cause we don't control the clipping distributions. Right. So people will post like super negative moments that are more of a rarity. It goes more viral. Yeah, exactly. So, so it looks more negative than it is. Yeah. When it's like 99% positive interactions. That's good to hear. Yeah. So I don't really have a problem, but, um, it'll be, it'll work itself out soon.

[81:23] The whole kick clipping thing is just, uh, it's, it's insane. Like they used to, when the program first started, people were like editing my face all weird. And it was just like the wild, wild west. I'd do like AI stuff. Uh huh. Now it's a little bit more regulated. Okay. Okay. Um, that was responsible for like a lot of the views at the start. I would say I kind of like December is when I went like gig, a gig, a mainstream. Uh huh. After the one cyber truck thing. Yeah. It was like a big one that a lot of people found out about me from. Yeah. What else? December was just a huge month views wise. Yep. So that helped out a lot. Yeah. I don't know when, did you start seeing me pop up? Like when? Like in the fall? Shortly after we met in Los Angeles. And I don't remember what month that was. I guess that was, it probably was the fall of last year. Probably because of some stuff with Santa Cruz that I did. Maybe like a little jujitsu stuff or.

[82:23] Yeah. In 2025, I did a good amount of stuff with him. Yeah. So he's a cool guy. I've known him for a good amount of time. Yeah. Brendan's a great guy. And, um, yeah. And then it was like, I mean, there were a bunch of podcasts that you were on that were, they were clipped to be controversial and. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I was a lot more controversial, uh, when I first started, like intentionally now I'm a little bit less. That was part of the plan. Yeah. Right. It's like, you just leverage, you know, doing crazy shit. And then like, you kind of walk back a little bit. Wow. It's like all method. That's cool. Method to the madness. It's funny. You know, I didn't intend to do that, but it kind of worked out the same way for me. Carnivore was so controversial. Yeah. You know, I was doing crazy stuff in the beginning. I look back on those clips of myself and kind of laugh and I wasn't trying to make it weird. It was just, I was very enthusiastic in the beginning and I was super enthusiastic about the benefits that I got from carnivore. And I think there are a lot of people that benefit, especially people with autoimmune disease from elimination type diets.

[83:25] But I similarly look at my content from then now and think, ah, my perspective has evolved a little bit. I've softened a little bit and I just, I hope it's still helpful for people. So that's an interesting strategy. I didn't intend to do that, but I guess we all evolved, you know? Yeah. I mean, dude, I thought it was like the most comical thing ever. Just, you know, hearing all the terms to like someone who didn't even speak a fucking word of English. Your terms. No, no, like your terms. Oh. So that was like, uh, really funny seeing those reels back in the day. Yeah. Yeah. It was. Would you like go off, uh, and say like five different plant defense chemicals in a row? Yes. I just ripped. Oxalates and saponins and phytic acid. Yeah. Yeah. That was just the delivery. Like how enthused you were. Yeah. Um, it was, it was impressive. I, uh, I'm, I'm enthusiastic if nothing else. Yeah, no, that certainly made it. Um, cause when did you start getting super popular?

[84:25] Like 2021, right? I don't know, man. I mean, I started doing 2023, 22. Yeah. Somewhere in there. I started a carnivore diet for the first time in 2018. Or 2019. I was in my residency at the university of Washington. And then after I finished my residency, I moved to San Diego for a little bit. And I started experimenting with social media there. I had a podcast and then it gradually sort of grew from there. So it was probably like 2022, 2023 that things got, um, more popular, but things got more popular actually after I was doing the strict carnivore stuff. And after I was doing the stuff that was kind of low out there, I used to never wear my shirt on any videos. Yeah. Yeah. You'd walk through the grocery store. No shirt, no shirt, no shoes. Now the thing to understand about that is I was in Costa Rica and it's super hot and nobody, it's, that's normal there, but everybody was like, nobody knows. Nobody knows. What is this guy doing shirtless in a grocery store? So it worked out in retrospect. It was pretty funny.

[85:26] So you're, uh, you have a lot of takes on clothing, right? Like cotton and stuff. Man, it's interesting. I, so what is this material? This is just pure. This is cotton. This is cotton. Yeah. This is made well, hopefully organic cotton. These are cotton. My underwear is cotton. Yep. It's hard to find good shoes, um, that are not synthetic materials, but you know, there's, have you seen the studies? You probably laughed at the studies. They did studies on dogs and polyester underwear. So they took male and female dogs and they took dogs who were obviously still had their testicles and they wrapped them in polyester underwear and they saw a decline in sperm counts and motility. And the researchers don't really know why they thought maybe it was a bioelectric effect between the polyester and the skin of the testicle or the Sertolian Leydig cells in the testicle. But then it's actually been repeated in humans that the polyester underwear may have negative effects on fertility. So, you know, again, in your case, it's unique and you're not necessarily purposefully. Yeah. You're trying not to have any sperm in there,

[86:27] but I think it's interesting. And for people that want to conceive or want fertility or who are concerned about fertility, fertility as a leading indicator of overall hormonal status, that's interesting to me. And I think just the, it's such an easy switch to wear natural fiber underwear that I always do it or no underwear. You just go commando, whatever. Oh, that's brutal, dude. Like, you know, especially, uh, like if you're print maxing, what maxing print maxing, I don't know what that is. Like, uh, exposing yourself a little bit, like, you know, cause I used to commando max sometimes, and I remember there was like, this pretty high girl in the gym and I was doing tricep push downs when I first started taking roids and like, you know, that was a brutal experience. So they can see your junk totally. Is that what's going on? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So going commando is not, okay. You got to like keep it a little more subtle. Yeah. Yeah, for sure. Okay. Yeah. Fair. Fair. I got you. Cause I take Cialis and like melanotan sometimes.

[87:30] Okay. Melanotan is a scary one for me. We can talk about that. I don't take it right now, but I mean like, I think MT1 is better than MT2. I don't know the difference between them, but it's just, there's a melanotan two is melanocortin one, three, four, and five versus just MT1 is just melanocortin one. Yeah. So you just get the tanning mechanism without all the weird side effects, like, you know, the effects on leptin and like nausea, sexual function, all that. Isn't it positive for libido though? Yes. But it can be, but the prior prism is what scares me. Yeah. And, okay. So you're not concerned about like skin cancer. Cause that's like ridiculous. It's actually something that's going to be beneficial for reducing your chances of skin cancer. Cause you need less UV to tan. You don't think you could stimulate like melanocytes in a negative way? No, I don't think, well, I mean, obviously you're, yeah, I guess you could get moles and stuff like that.

[88:31] I would worry about that. Yeah. But I wonder just the, the melanocyte simulation for obviously melanoma would worry me. Um, I saw a reel, I reacted to a reel of a guy who took melanotan and he was super white and then he got so tan. And I thought, okay, I get it. I think humans look better. Do you think humans look better with the tan? Yeah. Why do you think that is? Uh, cause it creates contrast between the whites of your eyes, your sclera and your teeth, um, to your skin. Right. So that's what makes a person striking is contrast. So that's why certain phenotypes benefit less from being more tan and more so from, uh, actually being a little lighter. Like what phenotype? Um, um, I'm not gonna, um, it's a bit controversial. Okay. Okay. But, um, like that wasn't meant, that's just, no, that's just like a, according to like, you know, a lot of surveys and sexual preference studies. Uh huh. So that's not like my opinion or anything. Um,

[89:31] but yeah, no, for a phenotype like mine, uh, where I'd be like lower on the Fitzpatrick scale, whiter skin. Yeah. I would benefit more from being more tan, more tan. Okay. What's your ancestry? Irish. Okay. Yeah. Most majority. Mostly Irish. Yeah. Okay. Um, what about you? I'm Italian. My dad is entirely Italian, Sicilian. So saladino. And then my mom is German Irish. So. Okay. A mix of things, but yeah, I, I have a serious tan line right now. Like. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. You're, I'd say you're pretty tan. Pretty tan. Do you intentionally tan or just like from. Just from being in the sun doing things, man. I, I love being in nature. Like I just, I grew up in the suburbs and then my life really changed in my early twenties when I spent time in the wilderness. And so basically my early twenties were all wilderness. I don't know if you know this, but when I was 22 years old, I hiked from Mexico to Canada. Wow. So I walked 2,700 miles continuously.

[90:32] There's a trail there called the Pacific Crest Trail. And I walked from Mexico to Canada. How long did that take? Three months. Holy shit. So it's backpacking, right? But I, I love that. And I think in today's world. I'd rather do anything but do that. No. It's so good, dude. It was so good. This is before cell phones, but even today, I think it's so valuable for humans to, and this is not a sexy take at all, to be bored, you know, to like really reset dopamine, GABA, glutamate in, in the brain because we're so overstimulated with cell phones, these anti-boredom devices. And again, not a sexy take at all, but I think like being in nature is so good for humans. And at that time, it was just so good to unplug. You ever doom scroll or no? I try to avoid it as often. I almost never doom scroll. Yeah. I hate it. I hate it. I mean, I mostly doom scroll on X, but I'm like looking at my, my feed usually, which is just like clips of me. So it's not like, it's not totally doom scroll. Yeah. You're sort of doing research.

[91:32] I don't really look at other people's stuff. Yeah. I wouldn't say that doom scrolling necessarily, but it's, it's pretty, it's pretty scary what's happening to our brains today. You know, with just like, yeah, the immediacy with which we have a dopamine device, an anti-boredom device in our hands. Anyway, I got sidetracked, but I love spending time in nature. And I spent a lot of time in nature in my life, mountaineering, skiing. I was a ski bum for six years. Yeah. I skied for a while too. Oh, you did? Yeah. Every weekend for like 15 years of my life. Then I blew out my knee. So on the East coast. Yeah. Where'd you ski? I skied up in Wyndham, but I also skied all over West coast skiing. I did skiing in Europe and the Alps. Really? I've been all over. Nice. Have you been to Chamonix? Yes. That's an amazing, I love the, the, the, the, I was there in 2020. 2020. Yeah. That's February of 2020. The gondola from the town to the top of the, I think that's how you pronounce it. Like that's insane. So anyway, just being in the mountains and feeling small, it feels amazing to me. Like feeling small in the midst of like natural grandeur is really inspiring.

[92:36] I was just in Montana and I did some hiking in Glacier National Park. I'll have to show you the videos. Feeling small is brutal. That's why I started doing the shopping bag. You know? You know? No, it's different. You know? Like feeling small in nature, you know? Oh, yeah. Feeling small in nature. Like that's, that's a big deal for me. So my tan is mostly from just being outdoors. Yeah. Just being in nature. Like skiing is definitely fun. Skiing is amazing. Yeah. I don't like stuff on the beach. That's or like, um, you know, in the woods with like mud and shit like that. That's disgusting. Anywhere you're getting dirty. It's like, I'm not a, you're not there fan of that. Cause do you, what are your thoughts on like a deodorant? You don't use any of that, right? I, I don't, I don't like deodorants. So there are some natural deodorants. Now I worry about aluminum. First of all, in antiperspirants and dermal absorption of aluminum into the body. I think a lot about how to detox aluminum with like orthosilicic acid and things like this.

[93:39] Um, and some waters like Fiji water, although it's in plastic or like high in orthosilic acid. So maybe that's beneficial. So I'm trying to decrease my aluminum levels as much as possible. There are deodorants, which don't have aluminum. Those are better than antiperspirants, which do, but the deodorants with, uh, like parabens or phalates or endocrine destruction. I mean, Zai's like old spice. It's brutal. I'm not a fan. Yeah. Cause I mean, like this is the way I think about it. Like I'm 49. I'm really trying to keep my hormones as healthy as possible. So I just got my blood work done and I don't take any TRT and never have my testosterone was 775. So pretty good. Pretty good for last time I checked it, it was eight 50. So like high seven hundreds, eight hundreds for a 49, almost 50 year old man. That's, that's what I want. So I have to be a little bit cognizant of endocrine disruptors in my environment. Would you ever take TRT? If, if I were doing everything else right and my hormones started declining, I would absolutely consider it.

[94:40] Based. Okay. Yeah. I'm not, I'm not opposed to it in theory. I just think that like, I'm interested in the experiment. Like how long can I keep my hormones healthy? How long can I keep my testosterone high as a man? And I know most of your audience is not 49 year old dudes. So their testosterone is probably really high, but you know what? I've met a lot of men, young men in their early twenties or mid twenties or late twenties who had testosterone that were lower than mine. Oh yeah. Significantly. It's very common. It's very common. Your testosterone levels, I would say that most people, uh, if you were to do random lab works on the average 20 year old, I, I doubt most of them would, would be anywhere close to that. Yeah. And so I don't know if it's overtraining or poor diet, inadequate nutrients, bad sleep combination in, you know, endocrine disruptors. But that stuff is interesting to me because you know, some people want to do steroids. That's their choice. I think that stuff's kind of scary, but, um, yeah, if you don't want to do that, you know? Yeah. No,

[95:40] I mean, it's just like, it's a lot easier to do what I do than to do what you do, in my opinion. But you know, like for me, and this is just the way my brain is built. That's like my, that's my neurodivergence. Yeah. Like I'm just so obsessive about cleanliness in my environment. And I don't think everyone that consumes my content needs to be as intense as I am. I just hope that by being intense about it or obsessive or thinking about it a lot, I can tell people what I think is a way to do it and they can consume it or use it if they find it valuable. And discard it if not. So certainly, I mean, that's the way you do it, right? You have to be the astronaut that's going to go out and be like, I'm going to go to the extreme so that people can find value or not in what I do. Yeah. No, I mean, I definitely appreciate it. And I'm certainly the extreme end of the spectrum for my niche. So we can definitely relate there. Yeah. Yeah. I appreciate that. Yeah.

[96:40] I think there's some similarities there. It's hard to be different than people. That's made, you know, relationships difficult my whole life. Me as well. I mean, it didn't really start becoming super easy for me until I like status max super hard. Now it's like, but there comes a whole bunch of issues just from that aspect. How so? Things being inauthentic. Right. I'm not sure if people want to be friends with you for the right reasons. Right. Right. That's tricky. Girls in Miami, just being girls in Miami, you know, whatever. Is it, is it like that? I mean, I imagine you get a lot of attention, some for the wrong reasons. Yeah. Yeah. Certainly. I mean, everything in Miami is like for the wrong reasons. It's like Sodom and Gomorrah here. Yeah. That's why I'm like, do you have kids? Not yet. Okay. Is that another reason why you haven't started TRT? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I definitely want to have kids. Okay. Yeah. So like I said,

[97:41] I, I got engaged recently, so working on it. We'll see. So once you get fully married, do you think you're going to do that? TRT or kids? Kids. Yeah, absolutely. That's rare nowadays for like people to wait to get married. To have kids? Yeah. I think it's important to have the commitment, you know? No, certainly. I don't, I don't disagree with you, but I just mean like the average person kind of does a lot of fucking craziness in marriage, like divorce rates. The dating market is one of the biggest things that I talk about when I go into like my whole ideology is it's, you know, very hypergamous and it's not the reality that, you know, even our parents or the previous generation grew up in. Your parents still married? Yep. Yeah. And that's a rare thing. Do you think, do you think it's possible for people to be monogamous longterm? Absolutely. Yeah. Yeah. No, I think it's in our nature to, to be, uh, a lot of the times. And I think that's how it was for,

[98:42] uh, you know, so many years. I mean, certainly polygamy existed and hypergamy existed back like, you know, when things were like tribal, but, uh, in like a postmodern context. Yeah. It's pretty normal. It's interesting. Do you know who Esther Perel is? No. She's a sex and family therapist, interesting woman, but I heard her say once that like humans crave, I think especially men, but maybe all humans, we crave intimacy, but we also crave novelty. And so I think there's this, this interesting balance between developing intimacy, with one partner, which would be a monogamy. And I think that's, that's a beautiful thing. And that's what I am espousing at this point in my life, you know, intimacy and monogamy. But I think that all humans have this also pull toward novelty and that's, that's a challenge for people. And I think that, yeah, it's, it's an interesting way. Like relationships are super valuable and super meaningful and they're challenging to navigate. Yeah, no, certainly. So, um, I mean, my entire thing is quite a different viewpoint than the traditional,

[99:43] like red pill, men's self-improvement stuff that you used to see, um, because they didn't really acknowledge any of the nuance about looks being important. You know, you just hear the common like advice, Oh, take this dating course and do this cold approach and you'll have success with women. Um, um, but it just wasn't working for some people and no one really knew why, uh, until you kind of go and tell them, well, it's cause you have a recessed maxilla or whatever the case may be. Um, so it's like so obvious, but no one was really talking about it. I think that's kind of why I was able to get successful so quickly on social media. Yeah, certainly something you're talking about resonated with a lot of people. Um, when I, when I saw what you were talking about in my mind, just the way that I think about it immediately went to like, how can we optimize the way that we look with food and the nutrients in food, fat soluble vitamins like vitamin K2. And, you know, I don't know if you've seen the density bone density, uh, optimal adult height. Yeah. You know, like, um, I think we probably all have genetic predeterminants of height,

[100:46] but based on our, our parents. But I think that if we feed our children the right foods, um, high in vitamin K2, high in zinc, out of a protein, out of calories when they're children, they can achieve their optimal adult height. Of course. For both men and women without premature closure of the growth plates. But if you don't give a kid enough vitamin K2, you know, whatever MK7, menaquinones, like in animal foods, predominantly their growth plates are going to close and they're going to be short. I mean, this is, it's kind of tough, but there's also like, you know, the fact that most of it is going to be about estrogen more so than vitamin K2. And you could achieve a lot more from HGH, exogenous GH than you can from, any of these like micronutrients. You think? Absolutely. Like a Lionel Messi type thing? Well, and the studies would agree with that. I think it's just, but then you have all these other issues with HGH for kids, right? Certainly. You know, scoliosis, musculoskeletal abnormalities. No, it's, it's absolutely got its, uh,

[101:46] its concerns and none of it should be done without a doctor's approval and recommendation. Sketchy. Yeah. Right. I'll leave that to the medical professionals. You know, I don't have, I don't have a degree. I'd rather. Is this you right here? That's my pink Porsche, bro. Is this not, is this not masculine? Dude, I don't know, man. I like it. I would drive that. That's, uh, OnlyFans girl for sure. What do they call that? Peacocking, right? Um, I think it's just like an indication of that you have an exclusive content for them. Have you been here before? Never. This place is cool, man. Okay. Looks nice. So they do no seed oils. They have grass fed steak over there. They have good smoothies. Let's get the grass fed steak. Yeah, it's good stuff. I, I really liked the podcast you did with Derek.

[102:47] What's up brother? How you doing? Derek from more place, more days. Yeah. Yeah. That was a, that was a really good one. Which one? I think we did two. I'm sorry. I've probably seen both. Cause I, I actually did used to watch you a lot. I don't really have time to watch content too much these days, but, um, I was, I watched a lot of your stuff, him, I like bigger, Steve, probably the Leo too. I don't know if you've seen him. No, I don't know. Those are the main people I watch. Um, all right. So, oh, we order right here. Yeah. I think we order right here. I was just looking at the smoothies. Yeah, this is sick. They got good stuff. They got like, it's like a small boutique grocery store. They got grass fed meat. They got like chicken stuff. Duck eggs. Good eggs. Um, yeah. So those are like boutique brands over there. We're going to get lineage in here, hardened soil and stuff. It's good. Yeah. I feel like, um, I'm getting like IOIs. What? An IOI?

[103:48] What's that? Oh, I'll say it. I'll say it in a little bit. But, um, yeah, this place is good for like, there's four quadrants that you divide things into. Uh-huh. Uh, high quality and low quality and primal versus non-primal. Okay. So like when you're like identifying women, you're like, okay, high quality non-primal would be like a really hot girl. It was like, not like sexually deviant. Okay. And like high quality primal would be like a hot girl. It was like a club work. Okay. So you want high quality, not primal. Yeah. And that's like right here. It's like, it feels like the spot to be, this could be a spot for that, bro. Yeah. Not wholesome. Yeah. High quality. Yeah. Right. Exactly. Have you been to Erewhon in LA? Hopefully not too wholesome. You know what I mean? I don't know. It's good to be wholesome. We like wholesome. Yeah, yeah, yeah. For real. We like wholesome. Have you been to Erewhon in LA? Yes. This is kind of like they're trying to do here, which is cool. Yeah. So yeah, I appreciate it. I like what they're doing. I, uh, I have a shake coming soon. What's that? They're making me a flavor there.

[104:49] Are you doing a smoothie? Yeah. They're kicking off Haley Bieber for me. No. Yeah. They're getting rid of Haley Bieber for you. Yeah. Her smoothie has like crushed there. I can't believe that. I know. That's impressive. Nah, I'm just kidding. I was like, what? Really? Like you're kicking a Haley Bieber out of heroin. I know. I did a smoothie there a while ago. Did you? Yeah. The saladino shake? That animal based smoothie. Yeah. Oh, they didn't put your name on it? They did. Dr. Paul's animal based smoothie. And then they got rid of it. It was like blueberries, bananas, honey, kefir. We had some organs. Do you mess with like organs at all? Like liver? Fuck no, dude. Why not? It's just disgusting. What if you did capsules? I mean, that's fine. I'll get you some capsules. Capsules I take. Yeah. Because one of my companies, Hardened Soil, we do capsules of like testicle, capsules of liver. Yeah. That's, I don't know how you eat that shit like raw, man. That's, because you freeze it, right? You freeze it and then you cut it up into small pieces. And it like,

[105:50] you know, it doesn't really taste that much, but. No way, Jose. But you can get the organs, the capsules, you don't taste anything. I cooked beef liver one time. Because, because of your videos, like two years ago. And I tried it and it's the most rant, that aftertaste. So I threw it all out. I was like, never again. Because I was like, holy fuck, it's only $2 for like this four pound fucking thing. It's super cheap. Really nutritious. It's super cheap because it sucks. It does. We're not used to it. We're not used to it. Like, it's an acquired taste. If you don't do, if you don't do liver when you're young, you'll never do liver. Hey guys. What's up brother? How you doing? What's up? Good. I think we need some grass fed steak. Okay. Why don't we do like, can I do a pound? Is that like, a pound and a half? A pound and a half? I would do one on the side or? I think we're going to do like, like, yeah, like, let's do a pound of grass fed steak. We'll split it. No, no, a pound each. A pound each. All right. Yeah. Nice. All right. How's your day going? I'm hungry. It's going good.

[106:51] How's yours? Yeah, really big. Doing good in here? Yeah. Okay. Do that. Some for him. Sweet. And what else we got? We got some, uh, they got some potatoes for you. I'm going to get some honey or something. Sweet. I'm going to get the potatoes for sure. Yeah. So we got Japanese soup potato, Brussels potato. I'll do the Japanese. Sweet. Yeah. They're great. Make them and then last fry them in avocado oil. Avocado oil? Yeah. We fry everything in avocado oil. Sweet. Even our tender. Nice. No seed oils, right? No seed oils. Right, you guys. What's up? All produce organic. Organic produce. Yeah. And all the produce. High quality. Yeah. Well done. Anything else for you? You good with that? I think I'm good. Cool. No, I'm good. Maybe he wants some.

[107:52] What's up? Any chimichurri fruit? No, no. What's up guys? How are you? Good. I think he's got it. Wait, can I look at these drinks over here real quick? Yeah, he's going to get some drinks. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. One second. Sorry? One second. One second. One second. No, I don't want chimichurri. I'm good. He might want chimichurri. You need food, brother? Yeah, get some. Yeah, get some. Um, sure. Yeah, let's get some eats for everyone. Go get some. Yeah, let's get some eats for everyone. Go get. You want some? You want some stuff? Go for it. Wait, they're, uh, they're gonna order too. All right. You got one more? Uh, you got one more? You got some more? Yeah, we got some more. Yeah, we got some more. Let's see if we got anything else over here. Just tell them. You need food? Yeah, what do you want? What?

[108:53] You don't want that? Just do the same thing that I did. So, just one more of these? Yeah. All right. All right. All right. Uh, you got one more? You got one more coming? Yeah, we got some more. Yeah. Let's see if we got anything else over here. Just tell them. You need food? Yeah, what do you want? What? You don't want that? Just do the same thing that I did. So, just one more of these? One more? Yeah. All right. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Hi, how are you? Good, and you? Good. It's nice to meet you. I'm Paul. You know, my brother is like, kind of weird. Oh, thank you. And I just changed my whole diet. Really? So, thank you. Wow, thank you. Yeah, it's a pleasure to see you here. Thank you. So, when you changed your diet, was that helpful for you? It was. Really? Yes. It was a lot, you know, I, I'm afraid now, but it was taking off the pills. Uh-huh. Yes.

[109:53] The hardened swells. Yeah, yeah. Then it stopped. Uh-huh. Okay, we'll take, start it again. Yeah. It's been great. Thank you. Can you just ring it up if you don't mind? Uh-huh. Yeah, being sure it works, it's a little more possible. Uh-huh. Cool. Thank you. I appreciate it. Thank you. I'm so glad it was helpful. Thank you. Throw on a discount. Thanks. Cherries, bro. What'd you get? There's actually some, there's some hot girls here. This is the place, man. This is like, like you said, high quality. Yeah. Like, this is like, I think that when you eat healthy, you're going to be more attractive, right? Is there any food here that reduces my glutamate? Uh, cherries probably.

[110:55] Cherries? It's like calming, right? No. No. Yeah, it's got to. Yeah, yeah, yeah. What's the mechanism of action on that? I don't know. I'm making it up. I'm making it up on the spot, man. I'm making it up on the spot. Cool. Thanks for lunch, man. No worries. You guys need a bag for all this? Do you eat right here? We're going to eat right here, I think. We're going to. Oh, good. Yeah. I'll get to the cherries. Thank you so much. You want to eat here, right? Yep. Go. Absolutely. Thank you. Yeah, it's good to see you. Good to see you. Yeah, good to see you. Good to see you. Good to see you. Alright, we'll take these two. Perfect. You want to come sit on this side? Yeah, yeah, yeah. There you go. I'll get the other clean out for you guys. Thanks, guys. I have to grab a napkin or something. Okay. Thank you so much. Wonderful. This looks quite ideal. It's like medium rare though. I usually get it like medium well.

[111:57] But it's just one way out here. I really want to come sit it on this side. I usually get it like medium well. What? Why? I just, I don't know. No, no, no. I get worried about the raw. No, no, it's good. Do you still eat raw? I do sometimes. That's brutal. That's the one thing I can never get over. Most of the time, I'll cook it, and it's fine, but we need four. Want some cherries? No cherries? No cherries. Clown. I'm just about to stick today. Alright. Take out my modern orthodontic appliances. What do you think about the third molars? I think you've talked about this, right? Wisdom teeth? Yep. Do you have them or no?

[112:57] I do. Do you know who Weston A. Price is? No. So, he wrote a book called Nutrition and Physical Degeneration. Super, super boring book. Amazing book. I was going to say, that doesn't seem like a banger. I know. Amazing photos. Amazing photos. So, he was like Indiana Jones in the 1940s, traveled all around the world as a dentist, and photographed indigenous people from all over the world. So, the 1930s and 1940s, there were a lot of these cultures that were at the intersection of, you know, being like wild cultures, right? So, living in a traditional way, and then coming into society. And what he would see was a massive difference in the health in these indigenous tribes. In Africa, in the Polynesian atolls, in the Norwegian countries. When the tribes were living traditionally, eating animal foods, eating fermented grains, eating no sugar, no white flour, they were super healthy, and their dentition was amazing. The photos in the book are stunning.

[113:57] There are these guys, huge wide jaws. Thank you. Oh, thank you. Huge wide jaws, and perfect teeth without dentists, right? Just with the quality of the foods they were eating. And so, they have this big jaw, like the width of the palate, right? Presumably, hypothetic, you know, hypothesis being, it's connected to the quality of the diet, the amount of these fat-soluble nutrients. And then, you know... Is that developmentally or...? Yes, developmentally. Probably prenatally and then during development. And then, you know, our modern diets are deficient in these fat-soluble nutrients. And the question is, do we then get these narrow palates, which create apneas or, you know, recessed maxillas, or all these problems with our facial development? So, Weston A. Price was kind of the original... Celibacy as well. What's that? They create celibacy as well. Yes, yes. Involuntary celibacy. Weston A. Price was kind of the original look-snackser, dude.

[114:57] And it was all about fat-soluble vitamins in animal foods. Meat, eggs, organs, things like that. Yeah, so that's the reason why the pasteurization process you're not a fan of is about the water-soluble minerals, right? In milk? Yeah. All right, we'll talk about that. Sorry, I go all over the place. No, good. So, raw milk, super controversial. Definitely a higher risk. Definitely a non-zero risk of contamination. Any raw food has that, right? There was just a lettuce outbreak with cyclospora, with Taylor Farms and Taco Bell. Well, cantaloupe. Raw cantaloupe is one of the most common sources of food poisoning. Spinach, right? Salads. Any raw food has a risk of contamination and food poisoning. So, raw milk absolutely has it, depending on the quality of the farm it's coming from.

[116:00] Why would you drink raw milk then? There's a series of studies that are really interesting looking at kids who grow up on or off farms, drinking raw versus pasteurized milk. And the raw milk drinking kids who grew up in the city or the farm have lower rates of asthma, eczema and allergies. So, the hypothesis would be there's something in the unpasteurized milk, whether it's a protein, a derivative of the whey protein, a cofactor or enzyme, or a bacterial milieu that affects the immune system differently. The best research is probably one of the whey proteins that changes the conformation when you keep the milk. But, the raw milk potentially can affect the immune system in a positive way for kids. And so, that's interesting to me. Obviously, there's a risk of contamination, just know your farmer. That's the main reason I like raw milk. I've never had a problem with it, it's just an individual choice. Okay. I think, for people that don't get... You think it tastes better than... I think it does.

[117:00] Okay. Well, yeah, in that regard, the chance is very low, but like you said, non-zero. Non-zero. My whole thing is like, people will talk all the time about the enzymes and like, you already have everything endogenously to digest from milk. Yeah, it's not about the enzymes. Yeah, people will talk about all the wrong reasons, but that... No. Okay, that makes a little bit more sense as a justification. Yeah. But, yeah, I think it's... That's why I was excited to do this because I'm not even trying to really be entertaining necessarily. I just genuinely have a lot of questions that I'm intrigued by myself about some of the stuff you talk about. There's so much to learn, dude. I mean, what's a rabbit hole? What's a rabbit hole? What's a rabbit hole? What's so fascinating, and this is what's cool is like, they never teach you this stuff in medical school. Right? I mean, I wouldn't know. But they do, I recall you said, what is it, like only 20 hours total of diet training?

[118:03] Or less than that? Maybe 20 minutes. 20 minutes? Really? Mm-hmm. Oh, that's interesting. Almost no diet training in medical school, or residency, or pre-med. That's terrible. Mushroom medicine doesn't think about it. It's very difficult... It's very difficult to test. It's very difficult to be profitable as a pharmacologist. Yes. Prescribing food. I've never seen a farmer... I've never seen a cow farmer driving a Lamborghini. Let's put it that way. Like, there are... Especially a grass-fed regenerative farm, right? Like, this meat they're serving here is grass-fed meat. Like, most of what they source here is from Neiman Ranch, which is a great ranch. Like, that's... The margins on that are fairly small, you know? Dude, I mean, it's just crazy, though. $40 a pound for this. Welcome to Miami.

[119:04] Welcome to Brazil. Well, but it's... They're cooking it for you, right? So... Yep. Cheaper... Cheaper than what you get in a restaurant. Is it? Not really. Well, actually, yeah. Oh, yeah, for sure. Yeah, it is. Because most of the time... Because we got a pound. Yeah. Most of the time when you go to a restaurant, you know, you get a New York steak. Granted, the ambiance is different, right? It'll be like eight ounces or ten ounces for like 50 bucks. 50 or $60. You know, or more. So, yeah. Not bad, though. And the convenience of having it cooked for you... Yeah, this place is a vibe. You know Chipotle is like one of the most common, like, health folks? Yeah. Literally the most, you know, lawsuits against them for food contamination or something like that. Really? Pretty sure they had to pay 1.25 million in fines last year.

[120:04] Wow. Something like that. It's probably better than McDonald's. But we had a petition for a little while. We were trying to get Chipotle to stop cooking in seed oils. You know? But we may go back. Is it just profit margins? I think it probably... Absolutely. You know? Tallow is more expensive than seed oils. It's just... Yeah. It's super... It's probably profit margins. And with that kind of stuff, it's so... People are so price conscious. Yeah. I think it might even be worth having, like, just a small selection of things that are, like, no seed oils. That way you appeal to that crowd. Yeah. Because people who don't know any better, they don't give a fuck. Yeah. But there's a lot of people on the internet who are, like, super opposed to seed oils. That's the one thing where I'm like, okay, modern research doesn't really show any issue with seed oils.

[121:04] So, I don't know. What studies do you usually reference when you talk about... So, I've got a good post on X that I can send you. Oh. When I'm looking at seed oils, I'm looking at the randomized controlled trials, right? I think we don't even have to talk about the observational trials. Let's talk about the randomized controlled trials with seed oils. There's 10 or 11, depending how you count them. And if you look at the majority of randomized controlled trials with seed oils, they're really, really poor design. There's a lot of confounders in the design. Things like the Finnish Mental Hospital study. So, you have a control group which is getting more animal fats and an experimental group which is getting more seed oils. In the control group, you also have more prescriptions of medications like thioritazine, you know, which can cause cardiac problems. So, this is the type of stuff that happened in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s with seed oil research. Like, the research is just so bad.

[122:04] Yup. It's so bad. You have, you know, the LA Veterans Trial where... Who's funding it? The American Heart Association, right? I mean, they... I don't actually know who funded a lot of these studies. Maybe the NIH funded it. Probably better not to ask. Yeah, who knows? You know, the LA Veterans Trial, you had significantly more... What's up? What? No. Go ahead. In the LA Veterans Trial, you had significantly more smokers in the control group. So, there's more heavy smokers in the control group. And then in the LA Veterans Trial, if you look at the amount of vitamin E in the control group diet, it was enormous. It was very, very low. So, if you're giving someone animal fats like butter or tallow in the animal fat group, which is what you do in a well-designed study, there would be far more vitamin E than you'd have in the actual study. So, having said that, when I look at the randomized control trials, there are three trials. Minnesota Coronary, Sydney Diet Heart, and the Rose Corn Oil Trial. And all of those show seed oils to be worse than animal fats for cardiovascular health and

[123:09] or longevity, morbidity, mortality. Okay. So, there are studies like Finnish Mental Hospital or LA Veterans or other studies that have poor methodology that show seed oils are not so bad. So, it's tough. When you actually look at the literature, you can't just look at a meta-analysis because it's not a level playing field, right? You have to go study by study and say, this study had these flaws. And to be fair, Minnesota Coronary, Sydney Diet Heart, and Rose Corn Oil, none of them are perfect studies. It's hard to do these, especially randomized controlled trials with humans and diet perfectly. They all have criticisms. So, when I get to argue with people about seed oils, it's all like, my study's better than your study. Or this study is what we should look at. But to say that the literature doesn't say seed oils are bad, that's not an accurate statement, truly. It just depends which studies you prioritize. Well, there's also like, you know, winning the debate and like, actually being right. So, like the way that you're explaining it, it's very complex, you know?

[124:11] Very complex. So, but you know, if you don't have to go into all that nuance and you're like, well, the majority of mainstream research is saying that seed oils are okay, that's a much more digestible take. It's a digestible take. It's a digestible take. I'm not sure it's an accurate take. No, that's what I mean though. Yeah. So, I mean, I didn't know that. That's interesting. It's not an accurate, I'm not sure it's an accurate take. I'll send you the post I did on X and I've done videos on this, but basically the way I think about it is like this. And again, this is technical. We don't have to talk about it too long. It's maybe boring for people. Fuck them. The problem with seed oils, I think is linoleic acid. This is an 18 carbon omega-6 polyunsaturated fat, right? Yep. This is the single greatest source of polyunsaturated fat in the human diet. The human body makes, we can make saturated fat. We can make palmitic acid, we can elongate it, we can desaturate it, right? We can put a double bond and make a monounsaturated fat.

[125:12] We cannot make polyunsaturated fats. Those are fats with two or more double bonds. This means that we store those fats. When you eat linoleic acid, your body stores it. You have a memory of how much linoleic acid you are in series. Probably two to four years, depending on which pharmacokinetic studies you believe. But it stays in your body. You incorporate it, you store it. And so if you look at it historically, like anthropology, ethnography, it's very hard to get linoleic acid in nature. Maybe a little bit in nuts in the fall. Meat is very low in linoleic acid. Even wild chicken or fish, very low in linoleic acid. You're never really going to get more than 2% of your calories, probably closer to 1.5, from linoleic acid in nature. Yep. Seed oils are this immediate bolus of linoleic acid in the human diet. They've suddenly made it very easy to get linoleic acid. Now our diets are 10 to 15% linoleic acid.

[126:14] So we have potentially 5, 7, 10 times as much linoleic acid as we ever have evolutionarily. Interesting. And my concern is that that is an evolutionarily inappropriate signal to our biology. So you think about, and again, this is just my hypothesis, but it's interesting to think about. When would we have gotten a little more linoleic acid as humans? In the fall. And if you look at what happens at the level of the mitochondrial membrane, there are mechanisms which suggest or corroborate the hypothesis that excess linoleic acid in the mitochondrial membrane creates membrane stress and a failure of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, which could lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and insulin resistance. A little bit of linoleic acid might be beneficial if you are a wild human in the fall. You get a little fatter and that fat carries you through the winter. Is linoleic acid a signal for winter is coming in humans? And today, we are constantly signaling to our bodies that winter is coming. Yep. So I'm always getting fatter.

[127:14] Because you're always getting fatter. Exactly. You're always giving your body excess linoleic acid. And as we know, polyunsaturated fats, more double bonds, are more difficult for the body to control from an oxidative stress standpoint. So again, the seed oil conversation is nuanced. What I tell people high level is like, spend a month eating little or no seed oils, see how you feel, and then spend a month and eat whatever you want. And see, again, there's a lot of variables there, but see what you think. I think that, I think humans should not be eating seed oils. The only difference I noticed like is satiation and different foods. Like, besides that, so like I feel very satiated from like what we just ate now. Even though I could probably eat a fast food meal from Chick-fil-A that's double the calories and probably the same amount of satiation. That's what I mean. So that's, that's very noticeable. That's noticeable. And that's immediate satiation. Yeah. I think it's interesting if you were to take an index, how satiated are you over the next three hours?

[128:14] Yeah, that's something that I'll definitely keep in mind. You know, because you can stuff yourself full of Chick-fil-A or In-N-Out and just get like actual stomach distention. I'm full. But my, my suspicion would be that you will be hungrier sooner. Right? Because when I eat food like this, man, you can maybe go the whole rest of the day without eating. I don't know about that for me. But it depends, right? Yeah, I haven't pinned my retta in like nine days, so. You haven't? No. Usually I do 10 mg every five days, which is like a giga dose. That's a big dose, bro. Yeah, I know. So, you haven't done it in 10 days. Why not? I've just been lazy. How do you feel? Do you feel different? Hungrier, but not much different. No. I would say that, I mean, I'll do that. Like I'll go two weeks without taking retta sometimes. And besides being a bit hungrier, it's not that much of a change.

[129:14] With, with the high doses of retta, do you notice anhedonia, like lack of interest in life? That's one of the things I worry about. No. No? No, I've been on retta since 2024. Uh huh. So, I mean, I can't really recall. I don't notice anything like that. I wonder. I think certain other things would probably do that. Like stimulant withdraws. Yeah. But no, nothing else. Because you know what's interesting? Again, I have not gone deep down this rabbit hole, but a little bit of research I did was really interesting. There are GLV-1 receptors in the brain, right? Correct. Obviously, that's kind of how it works. And they end up in these mesolimbic pathways, these pleasure pathways in the brain. It changes your dopamine reward system. Yes. That's how it works. And so, they'll probably be very helpful for addictions, but will they, my concern, has not been proven yet, could they potentially make us less interested in engaging in other

[130:14] reward-seeking behaviors? What? Socializing, flirting with people, finding mates, romance with your partner, this kind of thing. It makes like doing task-oriented things more rewarding. But all those are cope anyway, like socializing and stuff. Yeah. Mostly cope. Why do you say that? Well, I mean, what do you really gain from socializing outside of like being a live streamer? Don't you think that like humans are meant to be community-based? Well, that doesn't make it productive. Sure it does. Because then people are in your network and they can protect you or support you. Historically, you know, humans would support each other. I've, I, you don't get benefit from your friends. Um, I, I don't really have any friends. Sure you do. Yeah, you do. Not really. Really? In the car we were talking about this and you said it was hard to differentiate real relationships from people that maybe had interest in ulterior motives, but you don't think you have real

[131:14] solid friendships right now? Um, I would say that like I've, I do collaborations sometimes, but like, who knows what would happen if I wasn't a content creator, you know what I mean? But don't you think that with real friendships, people support you when you're having a hard time? You know, you, you vent to them, they give you advice. Like in my own, I hope this is the case for you. In my own life, my friends are invaluable. Community we know is so critical for humans and that sounds passe, but like, I don't know. I think that's kind of cool. Really? Yeah. I think I disagree with you, but we'll agree to disagree. Yeah. So Retta maybe wouldn't have the worst effects ever. I would say the M-SAM, the Selegiline, uh, M-O-A, uh, M-A-O-B. Uh, you know, that, that's certainly been the biggest change to my mental state. How so? Um, yeah, it's been super positive, made me super, super goal driven. Uh huh. And like being really like, uh, content motivated, but it's made me less social as well.

[132:16] So it's interesting. Do you stream every day? Yeah. How much of your day, seven days a week you're streaming? So you're just grinding right now. Well, I mean like most of the, like, I would say that maybe like four of them are like long streams and the rest are like only one hour. And what's a long stream? Four or five hours? Yeah. Okay. So if you were going to stream for one hour on a day, what do you do the rest of the day? Just work. Which is like making content or what do you do? Um, yeah, planning out different content. Um, like, you know, hiring people. What do you do for fun? What do you do for fun? Do you do anything for fun? No. I would say I do stuff for fun on stream, but not outside. You never do anything for fun off stream. I mean, sometimes like I recently started like occasionally going out off stream. Uh huh. Um, but that's like, it just feels unproductive. I don't know. Well, I mean, you're young. I get it.

[133:16] Like I flip flop on the issue. I don't know. Yeah. You're young and you feel like you need to work hard now. I think that's, that's laudable. And I think that doing things that you enjoy simply for the frivolity of it, simply for the fun of doing things that you enjoy, that's important to being a human. You know, that motivates me. Like that's one of the reasons I live in Costa Rica part of the year is that I get joy out of surfing. It's not productive for any of my content, but it's time away from my phone. I think about things, but the joy that I get from surfing waves is actual joy that I can bring back into the rest of my life with my work. I wish I had that, but you could. Um, activities and hobby. I just haven't found something that I like maybe since skiing, right? Yeah. Yeah. Skiing. It's not terrible, but it's just kind of something that like I would put up with because my parents made me do it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't know if I would do it on my own. And I think this is individual, you know, like it's hard for, I think for some people it's hard to find things that you enjoy.

[134:20] What are those? Are those shakes like the, the same as like Air One or whatever? They're pretty good. Yeah. What do they have? I don't even know, but you should go check it out. We should go check. Yeah, let's go check. I just saw people walking with them. The shakes? Yeah. Yeah, I'm curious. They're just good shakes. Let's see what they got. Hey there. Hey, what's going? There you go, bro. What's up? Let's see what we got. We're checking out your smoothies. All right. Let me know if you have any questions. Okay. They're all good options. They're all almond milk for you, bro. All right. We have on the move. I can change any of the milk. You got any ones that are like coconut flavored? I'm just really coconut flavored as the, as the main. The nudists. The nudists is one of my favorites. Has a little espresso in it. On the move is great. It's great. Um, I don't know if you have any questions. I don't know if you have any questions. Yeah, I don't know if I'm going to go. I'm going to go. Yeah. I'm going to go. The braic, um, berries, peanut butter. The number one seller is the love language. The strawberry banana-based.

[135:22] Like, what are like the main flavors of some of these? So I don't really get it. So... on the move?" Berries and peanut butter profile, I would say, Aphrodisiac would be chocolate, a little bit flavored. Macha Mafia has Rocky's Matcha in it, and that, that's very popular. South Beach detox, heartache and kind of like a heavy metal detox smoothie. Sundaes, very bright. I would say like mango, pineapple and then love language strawberry or banana. Nudis, like I said a little bit of espresso in there. Could I do the mango one that you said? Yeah absolutely, sundaes. Yeah great. Any protein in that? Or just plain as is? Yep, plain as is. That looks pretty mugged. I think you'll enjoy it. This guy loves mangoes. I did honestly. Oh alright, there we go. Bro we have such good mangoes in Costa Rica. Yeah I probably would never go to South America and do streams because I've seen a lot of streamers get kidnapped down there. Yeah, yeah. But like that happened a lot in Brazil mainly. Uh huh.

[136:22] They have velas and shit. So I get worried about that. Yeah, Central America, maybe Costa Rica is a little safer but who knows. You want one of these? No I'm good, thank you. I'm good. Thank you so much. Appreciate it. No worries. And then it'll be ready right around the corner. Sweet. Yeah, enjoy it. Thank you guys. Wow. $25. 25 max. Yes bro, right? Yeah, that's brutal. Yeah. So I got some of these in the car for you. Some lineage bars. I'm going to show you our protein bar. Which is I think better than any of this stuff. Is there ingredients? What's the ingredients? The ingredients in our protein bar are... Grass-fed though. I don't know man. Grass-fed whey protein. Grass-fed collagen. I'm going to show you the lineage bar. This is a different bar. Grass-fed collagen that's going to break down into random amino acids. No, it's just proline, hydroxyproline and glycine. That's good. But collagen supplements are a hope. I think if you're not getting enough collagen, they can be helpful. Well, I mean if you're not going to get collagen, but if you just take a collagen supplement, it's just going to break down into whatever.

[137:25] I think there's evidence, we can confirm this. I think there's evidence that if you take collagen peptides, they get digested into di-peptides. So two amino acid fragments that actually have signaling roles in the human body. I remember seeing a study that showed that a collagen di-peptide actually did trigger more collagen production in the human body. And if you've got... I think a lot of humans don't get enough glycine. So there is a glycine gap. This is interesting that like most humans probably need, I mean depending how you do the stoichiometry, 7 to 10 more grams of glycine per day in their diet. I know a lot of supplements have glycine in it. Yeah. But we don't get enough glycine, which is the simplest amino acid and it's a building block of both glutathione and collagen. And so if you don't get enough glycine, you can't make enough collagen and you can't make enough glutathione. Glutathione is of course this interesting... I take that exogenously. ...important antioxidant. So glycine is like really, really central to human physiology.

[138:26] And collagen supplementation I think is valuable by simply just giving you more glycine. Even if it gets broken down into pure glycine, you can use the glycine to then go back and make collagen in your body. Okay. So that's valuable too. So the Lineage protein bar, I got these for you. Grass-fed protein, grass-fed whey, grass-fed collagen, tallow, honey, some macadamia nuts, coconut. That's it basically. Okay. Yeah, it's super clean. I'll give it a shot. Yeah, we'll get a taste test because it's like so much of the other protein bars are like kind of... They're just wonky, you know? People are trying now. They've got some decent ones here, but... Looks that way. Yeah. It's like... And again, like you said it well in the grocery store. Like just eat a steak unless you're on the go, right? Yeah. I mean, that's a good backup plan if you're like gas station maxing or something, but... Yeah. I don't know, the ones at gas stations that are like the super artificial dairy ones, they taste terrible in my opinion. They taste terrible. Weight protein tastes disgusting is my main problem with it. We'll see. We'll see if you like ours.

[139:26] I think you're gonna like it. Yeah. We'll see. I mean, I usually... I'm a harsh critic. I think you'll be honest. Okay. I think you'll be honest. Yeah. Yeah. I think you'll be honest with us. But yeah. So... I mean, this is cool. They got like... Good produce. I don't know if you've seen these. They got potato chips now, cooked in tallow. That's cool. Potato chips. Yeah. It's happening. It's, you know, still... Sweet potato fries, dry freeze. What else is here? Tortilla chips. Tortilla chips cooked in tallow. Almond butter. This place is trying, man. They're doing good stuff. It's on glass and shit too. Yeah. As much as they can. Nothing that's really jumping out. To me. I mean... I'm not like, wow, I need this. No. Whoa. Okay. That's some cereal though. Look at this. Do you eat cereal? No, not anymore. But I used to as a kid growing up. I mean, the cereal is better than other stuff, but...

[140:27] Okay. We have some pancake mix. Let's see. What's the ingredients in here? Uh, where do we... Ingredients. Almond flour, arrowroot, Oh, I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. I'm not sure. It's almond flour, arrowroot, coconut sugar, coconut flour. Okay. So pretty, pretty solid. Pretty good, man. Pretty good. Even the cake looks... Even the cake is probably healthier. Manila. Wow. That's a pretty solid list. I should get some of this and have the girls make some cupcakes. Yeah. Will the girls make cupcakes? Probably not. Do they know how to bake? Probably not. I don't know, bro. We could try. I don't pick them based on baking abilities. Let's just say that. No? Yeah. That's like very... I'm the one who bakes the cookies where I'm from, you know? Is it? It's like, that's non-primal, though. It's like very wholesome. All the stuff. Do you remember, did you ever see the original Kale is Bullshit video?

[141:30] Kale is Bullshit? Probably. Yeah. That was like one of your more popular statements. Don't you have a t-shirt that says that? Yes. Yes. Kale is Bullshit. One of the first videos I ever did was like, Kale is Bullshit. And the idea was defense chemicals, right? Yep. So Kale is part of the Brassica family. We're getting kind of technical here. But the Brassica family has a series of compounds in them called goitrogens. Specifically... Goi? Goitrogens. Goitrogens. No, no, no. Isothiocyanates, which can inhibit the absorption of iodine at the level of the thyroid. So I think, I don't know. I'm not a fan of Kale. It gives me massive gas too. This was one of the major gas producers for me. So we talked earlier about like how I used to fart like crazy and Kale would crush me. Yeah. So I mean... This is an interesting purple cauliflower. Purple cauliflower. You know this is the same species as Kale, right? The same with this. So this is the broccoli Romanesco. This is like... I always used to love this. Like this is fractals, man. Wow. That's some pretty crazy broccoli.

[142:31] I mean, that would look amazing if you were on psychedelics or in theogens. Do you take that? Psychedelics? I've done mushrooms twice in my life. They're cool. Bro, I hate those. And I don't do them anymore. I did big doses because I wanted to experience it. Have you done it before? Yeah. I've done mushrooms two or three times and I've done LSD once. I think that like you can do too many psychedelics. Oh yeah. Connor Murphy, Max. I don't know. Is it he? Yeah. Yeah. He... Interesting scenario with him. Yeah. Passed away. Is he the guy that died in Thailand? Yeah. Oh. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So no, I mean... The way that I think about it is like you're in an altered brain state and you might come up with these ideas like I'm going to be like a singer or some shit and convince yourself that it makes sense. Yeah. Because your brain state is altered and then you're like, fuck, you turned into a hippie or something. There's some interesting research happening now for PTSD and stuff in veterans, but I

[143:32] think people should be careful with them. I think they can be overused very easily. Oh, thank you so much. Thank you so much. Well, there's also a lot of research about ketamine for PTSD. Yeah. Well, that's a psychedelic, but I use that a lot. Huh. Same with... I've never done ketamine. Brian Johnson is very into the ketamine. Is he doing a lot of ketamine now? I know he was doing a bunch of the psychedelics. Yeah. He's a big ketamine guy. Bro, we need to get Brian Johnson to eat some meat. To eat some meat? Yeah. Is he not... Is he fully vegan? He's fully vegan. I've talked to him once or twice before. Yeah. So have you done anything with him? I have not done anything with him formally. I met him a couple times, hung out a little bit. And yeah, I think he's a good dude and he intends to help people, but I disagree with some of his conclusions in the end. That's how it's supposed to be. It's good to have healthy discussion with people. So I don't think he's wrong necessarily in his facts, but I think he's just wrong in what he's trying to do. And he's trying to have his lifespan just be this super ridiculous because obviously when you eat meat, any MGR signaling protein, it's aging, right?

[144:43] And he's trying to be catabolic. Yeah. So... Yeah. I don't know, man. I think that so many things trigger mTOR that are so valuable for us as humans. Exactly. Exercise. I agree. Yeah, yeah. So like... And I don't know if I consider it aging because without mTOR, you're like a dwarf, you know? Right. But that is technically what's necessary to have your lifespan be as maximized as possible. But it's like, why would you want to live this extended lifespan as like a subhuman like I said before? Yes. Yeah, yeah. So I'm very pro mTOR obviously working out. Yeah. All that shit. Like I don't want to be 130. And skinny and like weak. I'd rather be like 70 and, you know, blasting roids. Yeah. Maybe somewhere in the middle. Maybe somewhere in the middle. I'm not convinced mTOR is going to shorten your lifespan. I think there's so many valuable roles for mTOR in the human body. But yeah, I wouldn't want to be... You see these guys. What worries me about Brian Johnson is that people will try and adapt his methods.

[145:47] The fact that he's doing a calorie-restricted vegan diet, I don't think that works for many people, you know? You think about the number... We talked earlier today, you know, like the value of red meat in the human diet. Crenatine, carnitine, anserine, taurine, B12, K2. Like it's so hard to get the nutrients you need on a vegan diet. Maybe you could do it if you're super, super intentional. But it's just so hard. And then a calorie-restricted vegan diet, it's like, man... You have to be super autistic to fucking follow a diet to that level of a C. And look, I mean, I respect autism. That's where a lot of beautiful, intelligent people live, you know? But I don't think it works for many people. I don't think it works for many people. And that's... I think he does a decent job of saying that. But I just want him to say that clearly, like, hey, a calorie-restricted vegan diet is not the only way to live well and long. There's plenty of people in the world... You know about the blue zones? No. So the blue zones are this concept that Dan Buettner came up with, with National Geographic. Democratic states.

[146:48] No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. There are five regions of the world that people always think about as longevity regions. It's Okinawa, Sardinia, Loma Linda, California, the Nicoya region of Costa Rica, and I'll think of the fifth one in a second. But the problem with these, it's Ikaria and Greece. The problem with it is that, like, when Dan Buettner and National Geographic went to these places, they conveniently overlooked the fact that in four of the five places, they all eat meat. Like, Greece, Sardinia, Okinawa, and, you know, other regions of the world that have longevity, they all eat meat. Loma Linda is a Seventh-day Adventist town where, like, the religion doesn't permit the eating of meat. But it's interesting, like, if you look at longevity, there's no good evidence suggesting that longevity is inversely correlated with meat consumption, right? So there's no evidence, really, that meat shortens our lifespan. There's actually evidence that meat lengthens the lifespan.

[147:48] There are observational studies which may be confounded by, like, gross domestic product of the country that you're looking at. Because meat consumption correlates with more financially advanced countries, which is, like, better sanitation. But I think that there's a lot of convincing evidence that eating meat correlates with a normal, long, healthy lifespan of humans. So I don't want people to worry about that. I just, I'm such an apologist for meat. Yeah, exactly. I mean, I would say it's definitely just a small bit of nuance. And, like, I'm not saying, you know, don't go out and eat meat if you want to live a long time. But I'm just saying, like, if you're taking things to the absolute extreme with longevity maxing, technically he's not wrong, in my opinion. Some of it is interesting, yeah. I think that, yeah, some of his methods, I think, yeah, questionable. And it's interesting to see where it all ends up. You know, I mean, what's your bet?

[148:49] How long do you think he's going to live? I think he's probably going to live to be about 85 or 90 years old. Well, right now I think he's got some autoimmune issues, right? Yes. This was a big thing recently that he had this autoimmune gastritis. There was some controversy on X about, like, the actual diagnosis when people were looking at the biopsies. There were some people theorizing that it was related to the hundred different pills that he drinks, that he eats daily. You know, that might have created some irritation in the lining of his stomach. But who knows? What do you speculate? I mean, I think that he could have autoimmune gastritis. He has autoimmune thyroid disease. And so that's the other thing with him is that if he were not, he's been taking thyroid supplements since he was in his 20s. And with his calorie-restricted diet, his thyroid would be tanking, right, if he were not on levothyroxine. And so for me, when he came out and started talking, look, none of us are perfect, but I felt like it was a little disingenuous of him to say, I'm the healthiest human on the planet and I have the best biomarkers on the planet.

[149:54] When you're really just covering your thyroid disease with a thyroid hormone, right? Because we know that your TSH would be high, your thyroid hormones would be tanking on a calorie-restricted diet. You just can't restrict calories like that and expect your thyroid to be happy. And now he's come out and said, oh, I have autoimmune gastritis. And it's like, oh, so you weren't the healthiest human on the planet and all of your biomarkers weren't perfect? I feel like I'd keep that one under wraps if I were him. He got a lot of flack for it. I ain't got a lot, yeah. I probably want to post it about that one. But look, like, respect for being honest. Respect to him for being honest. But I think that, you know, like, we've all made errors. But to say, I mean, he was brazenly saying, I'm the healthiest human on the planet. And it's like, bro, you have your ferritin, you know, your iron stores are super low. You know, you're not, you know, like, okay, look, we're not expecting anyone to be perfect. And we appreciate the quest toward longevity and health. But that was just, that really rubbed me the wrong way. And, you know. He's interesting regardless.

[150:55] Yeah, he's an interesting guy. Clearly very intelligent. Yep. You know, and thinking about stuff in interesting ways. So, I mean, yeah. We got to get back to your fun, though. Okay. How do we find things that are fun for you, dude? Like, that's important. We should walk around. Yeah. You want to walk around? Yeah. Like, that's probably the best way. Yeah. I mean, usually my fun is just, like, going out and partying. But, like, I definitely need to find some more health-oriented ideas. Yes. It's a good steak. You get enough? Yeah. Just throw this shit away. I don't know how it works here. All right. There's a trash. Oh, thank you, brother. There's a trash. How was everything? Dude, the steak was amazing. It was so good. Thank you. Thank you, guys. Yeah. We'll see you soon. Yeah, take care.

[151:56] Thank you, brother. Yeah, wonderful. Thank you. Thank you. All right. See you. Take care. Thank you. At least they let us do our video. All right. So, I don't know exactly where we are in Brickle. Dude, you know Brickle better than I do. I never hang out here. Yeah, I mean, I don't know. There's like day clubs and shit. I'm trying to think. I just have to open up a map to see. Airway. Can I just put these? Yeah. I think we're probably in like a walking distance to somewhere good. Yeah. Let's see on the maps here. Hey, guys. How you doing? How you doing? Hey, what's up? What's going on, guys? We're near. You fucking crushing it. You too. I can't vote for you guys. Thank you. Hope it's helpful. Yeah, so I don't know. If we want to go like just kind of mess around in the main area for a second, we could do that.

[152:59] But we need to get what? The groceries back. Yeah, let's actually just. Yeah, I forgot about that. We got to. I think everything in there is good. Nothing's going to spoil. Okay. I do want to try your supplements. Yeah, let's do it. Yeah. So let's drive back to your car and grab that. Yeah. Oh. But yeah, I'll work on finding my hobby a little bit. I think it's important for humans, man. Like, you know, you got a long life left, dude. You got to have some. You got to enjoy it. I think I'll probably be working for a while before I start messing around there. But like I said, I think that. I mean, I like online gambling. I don't know. What do you play? Steak. Oh, that. I mean, like slots. Slots? Yeah, it's just like all the colors and stuff. It's very dopaminergic. Wait, what?

[153:59] You're playing slots? Yeah. But isn't that just rigged against you? It's just like. Well, not really. I mean, like I'm like a gambling sponsor. What does that mean? Like, you know, I have a gambling deal. Uh-huh. So you promote the gambling online? I do it on the stream, yeah. Okay. Okay. That's, you've never seen, like, that's like the main reason Kik is a thing. Kik is what? Is a thing for people to gamble. Really? Yeah. I didn't know that. Yeah. So, because Twitch and YouTube banned gambling for certain casinos like Steak. Uh-huh. So they made their own platform. Interesting. Uh-huh. So you gamble on the stream with like the slots. Uh-huh. I've never done it, man. I've never done it. It's, but it is, it does sound like. Little Pines of Up. It does sound like it's very dopaminergic. Well, I wouldn't do it if I didn't get paid. Uh-huh. So, like, it obviously is not great. I think we need to run back to the Whole Foods.

[155:00] Yeah, that's what we're doing. To grab my car, yeah. It just looks like it's going. Oh, my bad. I don't think I actually put a. Oh, that's it. You have it? All right, sweet. Do you usually listen to music or not? Dude, I don't love music. Hmm. I don't love music. So when you're in the car, you don't just listen to anything? I don't listen to music very often in the car. What, like podcasts? Podcasts or just, I just think. I just like the silence. Yeah. I just kind of give my brain space to like kind of expand a little bit. My, yeah, my fiance thinks it's crazy, but I, some music I like. But, man, it is hard. I kind of only listen to like the house music, like the fucking EDM shit. I like that, some of it, but I don't like all of it. That's kind of a main thing. And I like some classical. Classical. And I think they kind of sound the same. But like some EDM sounds like classical to me.

[156:01] Interesting. Who do you like in EDM? Like Fisher, like Tech House, mostly. I don't know. Yeah, that's just like what they play in the clubs mostly. So, yeah, put that all the way. Get some sunlight in this bitch. That's pretty nice. We're still trying to experiment with all the features of the car. Did you guys just get it? Yeah. HDMI. Fuck, headphones here. I know it's just really fast for being like a couple ton car. It is a very fast car. The V is super fast. Do you enjoy being in the club? Do you like to dance? Yeah. I would say the music is like the main part of it. Like some people go to like, you know, drink and talk to girls and shit. But I mostly go because I like music. Do you go by yourself or do you go with people? I mean, I don't really go anywhere by myself. Yeah, I go with people. Do you consider them your friends?

[157:02] Usually just random girls. Okay. Yeah. Not with guys? No, not usually. So like what I do is I fill up my whole house with like all the guest rooms at bunk beds. And then we fly in like random girls. Are you serious? Yeah. Don't you have a girlfriend? Yeah. I don't know. You tell me. I don't know. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I do. I get a girlfriend. Not the same one that was with me the first time we met. But I do have a girlfriend. And then? She crashed out the other night. She wasn't too happy about that. She got in a fight with them. She got in a fight with the girls? Yeah. Like all the girls? I think like three of them. Oh my God. How does your girlfriend think about all these other girls in your house? I'm probably not the biggest fan, but it's work. So like what am I getting? You know what I mean? So you go to the clubs with girls? Yeah. Just to like talk to people and have interesting interactions? No, to hook up with them. So your girlfriend is okay with you hooking up with other girls?

[158:07] Is this not something you're supposed to talk about? No. Yeah, obviously. Like it's just work. You know, it's not serious. Like for guys, you can like get with a girl and it's just like a release. It's just physical. Uh-huh. You know, for girls, it's like a lot more of an emotional practice. Uh-huh. So that's why it works. You know? Like I can get with a girl and literally not ever think about her again like the immediate day after. Does it make it hard for you to connect with your girlfriend? No. No? She's different. I don't know. Just like how you categorize it. Do you feel like your connection with your girlfriend is different than with these other girls? Correct. Yeah. Yeah. So that's why like I don't really ever get too concerned by it. She knows that. And I think a lot of people have similar experiences because with just the way hypergamy goes in this day and age, like only 10% of guys are getting with like 60% of women. So obviously there's going to be a lot of like polygamy.

[159:07] Uh-huh. Whether that's a good thing or not, that's just the reality of the situation. I'm not here to agree or disagree. Yeah. With anyone's opinion on it. Do you ever, do you have any concern that will make it difficult for you to be with, do you want to be with one woman long term? Do you ever want to get married? Yeah. Like I don't, I mean, I wouldn't probably be just going around getting with a bunch of chicks if I wasn't like streaming. Uh-huh. Just like I'd probably just live a more chill lifestyle, stay at home more. But it's just like, it's content, you know? At the end of the day, people want to watch crazy shit. Yeah. So it's like very incentivized to go out and be an idiot. Yeah, it is. Do you ever feel like that's hard? Uh-huh. Like you always have to top your last stream? Not really. You always have to do crazier stuff? No, I don't really like go into things with any intention because something always happens like by accident. Just like, like any random interaction, it'll just go viral. Like I never really know what to expect when I do a live stream.

[160:09] That's kind of like the novelty of it is no one else knows either. What's going to happen? A YouTube video, it's like, you know, it's very predictable. It's edited. Uh-huh. But yeah, streams, really fucking anything. No, it's super interesting. I've never... You've never done a stream before? I've never done a stream. This is really the first one that I've ever been on. Okay. I like how real it seems, you know? Like one of the... My favorite thing to do of all my content is podcasting because it is... It's uncut. Yeah, it's uncut. It's generally uncut. Well, you do those live, right? Some of them you do live. A lot of them you do recorded, but... Technically, it's a stream then. Kind of, yeah. Yeah. It's a little bit different though. Yeah. Some of them get cut up a little bit, but... I hate when they cut mine up. Yeah. Because I'm used to doing an uncut stream, so it's like, why are you going to, you know, clip out certain moments? It's hard, you know? I guess this is... I think this is what's interesting about streaming and what's scary for people, but what's interesting about this is this is kind of like no net, you know?

[161:10] Right, yeah. There's no net. Like if you say something bad, everyone's going to know. Right. I mean, that's like a lot of fuck shit happens on my streams that I'd probably edit out if I were to be like a YouTuber. Uh-huh. But like it just works because it'll be a viral moment. Like whether it's good or bad, like who's to say? Who's to say in the end? Yeah. Yeah. Whether something will wind up to be like a stain on your career and your brand or just like winds up being like super popular. Do you ever think about that? Like... No. Do you get in your head about that? Not really. No? You just live? I kind of just like go into a stream like without too much. Like I don't really have any stress about it. I'm just like, I'm just going to go do my thing. I'm not looking for just like the next like big clip. I know it's just going to like happen randomly. Like the more hours you put in, the more likely it is for like some fucking guy to like jump on your car or whatever and you run him over. Or like, you know, goddamn whatever, whatever else happens.

[162:12] Get in fights, things like this. Exactly. Exactly. This is all just natural part of life. You know, and when there's always a camera, it all gets captured. Well, I think that's why people want to see it. That's interesting. You know, what's going to happen in real life? What are people's real lives like? In some ways, streaming is kind of, I don't know, maybe I'm romanticizing it because I've never really been a part of it. But in some ways, it's like an antidote to social media because it's like, hey, there's no editing here. I guess you could use filters, but this is pretty much how people are. I don't think you could use filters on streams. Yeah. Maybe on like a desktop stream if you're just sitting there on your computer, but not like not real. Not what we're doing. This is how people are in their real life for hours and hours. This is what humans are really like. That's interesting. Yeah. So like I used to stream a lot more hours, but now it's like, you know, per week we're probably doing like maybe 30 or something like that or less, maybe. I don't know. 20, 30. But I used to do like every day for 10 hours.

[163:12] I saw you did like 48 hours straight one time. Yeah, I did. I mean, I've done two weeks straight. But like you didn't sleep for 48 hours, dude. Oh, that. No, no, no. The longest I've ever stayed up was 56 hours off of like different amphetamines. And we just built like a raft out of like some random wood at Home Depot and took it out to this boat party. Wait, what? It's pretty fun. Yeah. Yeah, no, that was sick. We made like a DIY boat. All right. And that was a lot of fun. That's crazy. And that was after, that was part of the 56 hours of streaming on amphetamines. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So I always think of like really random ideas. Like when I, that's why like ketamine is like a good psychedelic for me. It helps me brainstorm like content ideas. But, you know, some of them make sense in my head when I'm like intoxicated. And I'm like, oh, wow, this is fucking stupid. They don't, they don't make sense in real life. Yeah. So what are you, what are you taking like on a day-to-day basis right now?

[164:14] You said you're on no amphetamines right now. No, not even any caffeine right now. No amphetamines, no caffeine right now. I'm, I usually take, so every single day I'm getting a little bit of testosterone, like 40 milligrams. Or maybe a little less, like 35. So like 35 mg of test. I'm taking 2.5 milligrams of minoxidil, 0.5 milligrams of getasteride, 9 milligrams of MSAM, Selegilene. I'm taking 10 mg of RETA every five days. But you haven't done it in like 10 years. Yeah, I haven't, I haven't been to just being lazy. I usually take, let's see, what else? 5 milligrams of nabivalol, which is a beta blocker. Is that because of the cardiac side effects of RETA? More so of the stimulants. Uh-huh, okay. And I take 5 mg of tadalafil for sexual function and just blood pressure. But my blood pressure is actually way too low.

[165:16] Like when I had my rhinoplasty done, they had to give me certain like meds to spike my blood pressure during the procedure because it kept dropping. Uh-huh, because of the tadalafil? No, just because my BP right now is like 110 over 70. Okay, that's good. Is that, that's not problematic? That's not problematic. Well, you mean, I mean, it's not, it's not too high, but it is, it's a little on the low side. What do you think about, is it, have you always had low blood pressure or is this a new thing? No, it's, I've, that's my blood pressure when I'm on like low doses of boroids. I've had high blood pressure before, even as high as like 130 when I took like 500 mg of tests. I was doing like a more bodybuilder focused cycle. But now it's, this is just pretty normal for me. And then, um, is that, that's on or off nebivolol? That's on the nebivolol? Yeah, on the nebivolol and on the tadalafil. Yeah, those are both going to make it a little, a little on the low side. So, I mean, I could probably take the nebivolol out on days where I don't stim maybe would

[166:19] be like a, a good way to, to kind of counteract that. How many days a week are you stimming? Um, probably like four or five. And you're using Ritalin, you said? No, not Ritalin. Oh. Um, I use usually Adderall. Okay, Adderall. Adderall or caffeine. I mean, I'll use caffeine probably like almost every day. Mm-hmm. Because before I work out, I just haven't worked out yet. I'll probably do that later. Uh-huh. So, are you working out every day now? Yeah. I have been. Because you were like, you were off the gym for a little bit, right? I've worked out for the past 10 days. Nice. So, yeah, everything's been going in the right direction. Does that feel good? Yeah, it does. I mean, actually, I don't know about feels good because like it's a lot, I get a lot more tired after the gym that, you know, and takes away some energy from streaming and work. Mm-hmm. But I would say that, you know, having a good physique is definitely worth it. Yep. And it improves the stream to degree because if you're better looking, like you're going to get more girls and it's going to go more viral.

[167:19] So, it helps. And the health benefits? Well, I mean, no one really lifts weights to be healthy is my thing. Come on. People lift weights to be healthy. The average person in the gym is lifting for a good physique and they don't really give a shit about being healthy. That's more of a cope. I think like doing cardio is healthy. Like if you're going on walks or runs, those people are usually more a little bit health conscious with their cardiovascular health. But no, the average weight lifter, I wouldn't say. I lift weights to be healthy, but I think about it as like I'm trying to prevent injuries in the sports that I'm doing, whether it's surfing or martial arts. Yep. And I want to optimize those sports. So, I want to be as strong and as mobile in any positions. And so, I actually feel like I don't have to do cardio every day to get the, and we could do a little, I'm not sure about this. I'm not sure how much BDNF you get released from lifting weights because that's interesting to me. I know that from a mental health perspective, I feel better when I get, let's just say a

[168:20] good dose of brain derived neurotrophic factor from some sort of exercise. Yep. And I think my sense, subjective sense, is that lifting weights gives me BDNF because my brain feels more calm, right? Yeah. When I move my body. And a lot of the ways that I lift weights do involve the cardiovascular system. Like I'm doing squats with a dumbbell or I'm jumping rope or I'm doing pull-ups. You know, I'm breathing after 10 or 15 pull-ups. Like I'm breathing hard. It's a little bit of a sprint. And then every time I work out, I'll hit the punching bag if I have one. So I'm doing some cardio, but I'm not just hitting cardio every single day. But even lifting weights for me feels like a health benefit just from the mental perspective. That's a bit different training style, I would say. Yeah. You know, versus like the hypertrophic training, which is like a lower rep range. Uh-huh. So I'm not getting really that same like cardiovascular benefit. You don't feel yourself breathing hard? No. No. But I get my BDNF from, it's like Simax. So I don't know. Simax. It's always funny because people have no idea what they're actually taking a lot of the times

[169:23] when they're doing things like Simax because they'll inject it. But it's not permeable to the BBB. So it doesn't even work. When was the last time in your life that you were on nothing? Because you've been in the Luxmax community for a while. You've been like doing stuff because you started testosterone really young, right? When I was 14, yeah. Oh my God, 14. So I think probably around then. Yeah. 14. Yeah. Would you ever consider going fully natty? Never. Never. No, that's a cope. I mean, for what? Don't you have any curiosity of how you would feel? No. No? I would feel worse. I wonder if you... Like it's not a question. Like I would feel worse. I'm sure you would feel worse in the short term. No, I feel worse in the long term too. I wonder. My testosterone levels are much higher being off my endocrine system than on it. I guess now you've done... There's no way to match it. You've done TRT for so long now that your testicles might not ever produce any testosterone.

[170:24] Even if the highest natural testosterone level in the world will never be comparable to taking TRT. What is your testicles? At a dose. What is your testicles on a daily basis now, do you think? When you check? Usually I'll be... Like on the dose of tests I'm at now, probably like around... I'm above 2,000. 2,000? Yeah. What does that feel like? You kind of only have like the honeymoon effect of like blasting roids and feeling it for like the first month. Like after the first week or so, your libido shoots up pretty significantly where you just feel like out of control. And then you kind of like notice all the physical effects and your drive goes up. But then it kind of all returns to baseline. Really? Yeah. So you don't really feel that different after like that first initial spike. Do you think that's androgen receptor density? We could ask Derek. I think so. And it's just like it just becomes your new baseline. Like same thing with the MSAM.

[171:25] It's like my dopamine levels are a lot higher because this allegedly prevents dopamine breakdown. But I'm not like constantly feeling this like super joyous like over the top phase like I was at the start of the medication. Because that just is your baseline now. You can't perceive it. Yeah. Philosophical question for you. Yeah. Do you feel happiness now? Yeah, I'd say so. Do you feel happy? Like on a daily basis? And then broadly, I'm also going to ask you the question of I love how I get to interview you on your stream. Yeah. Like I'm also curious. But first question is, do you feel happiness on a daily basis? Yeah, I guess. I mean, it's kind of hard not to be like a pretty good lifestyle. That's good. And then broadly, are you happy like with what you're doing now with streaming in your life? I don't really love streaming a lot of the time. I think it's just because I do it so much. When I first started doing streaming, I really liked it.

[172:26] But now it's just like, you know, when you have to do something every day, it gets a little bit boring. Yeah. So I think if I only streamed like, you know, once a week or whatever, I'd fucking be really excited for it. Uh-huh. But, you know, now when you're just like going every day, it's like, you know, it's not the most exciting thing. It's kind of become again. It loses its novelty. It's become your baseline. Yeah, right. Yep. The novelty goes away. The novelty goes away. Interesting. Interesting. So I do miss like the initial like fucking craziness of it, of like going out and like tons of people are coming up to you. And, you know, back in like October, November, it's a lot of fun. But, you know, it's not that cool for a while. Yeah. It's tricky. And it's only been like seven, eight months for me. It seems like something that would be hard to maintain. Will you go left here and we'll just pop in. I'll grab this stuff out of my car and then I'll roll with you guys back to your house. Sure.

[173:29] Yeah, we're pretty close to here regardless. Oh, cool. So we're right downtown. I'll just roll with you guys and then I'll take an Uber back or something. Let's do it. Yeah. Yeah, it's interesting. I feel like what you're doing is, has got to be hard long term. Yeah, it's mentally taxing. Yeah. Like especially if you're like staying up late the previous night and then you have to do like a stream. Yeah. It just, yeah, it definitely has a wear and tear, especially doing the nightlife content. Yeah. If you're substance maxing. If you're substance maxing, you're health minning. Yes. That's how I think about it. Yes. Yes. But I've always like said, you know, I don't think anyone should take stimulants. I think it's like probably one of the worst things that you could do for your health. I don't think anyone should drink. It's just all stuff that's like impossible for me to like hide because I'm on a fucking stream all the time. Yeah. I mean, people see it. Yeah. It's real life.

[174:29] What is your, what do you enjoy most about what you're doing now? Do you like meeting new people? Do you just like meeting the girls? Does that get old? Like what are you enjoying most about what you're doing now in your life? Um, I think just kind of like people treating you like much differently, like based on, on, you know, you having a lot of status, like, you know, maybe giving you a direct entry right into certain places. Or sometimes it's the opposite, you know what I mean? But, um, like just like at a restaurant, maybe people will recognize you and just go out of their way to take care of you. Yeah. That's nice. Stuff like that. It feels good. Yeah. That feels good. A lot of times it'll be like, uh, you're actually banned or you can't come in because you have a camera or whatever. Yes. It's a double-edged sword. So it sucks. Jump out, grab this stuff real quick. All right. Wonderful. Wonderful.

[175:34] What's going on? What the fuck is this bot? Is that why you asked if I was reading the chat? Yeah, well, I don't read the chat. I don't read it. Okay, let's take a look. So I don't like chocolate, but we could go for it. How about chocolate? Not chocolate. Coconut macadamia. I think that's, yeah, that sounds good. Coconut, vanilla, macadamia. All right. Taste test. Here we go. There you go, sir. 20 grams of protein in this thing? 20 grams of protein. Small. It's hard to get more than 20 grams of protein in a bar.

[176:34] But grass-fed whey protein, grass-fed collagen, tallow honey. Here you go. That one's for you. Yeah. You want one? I'll do it. Yeah. You want coconut macadamia? You want chocolate cookie dough? Chocolate. Mix it there. Chocolate cookie dough? Yeah. Yeah, I got you. Hmm. I would say that I... Here you go, brother. I would say that I like it. It's not like the super artificial tasting stuff, which I don't like. That gives you like a horrible aftertaste. Yeah. That's the worst part about it, is the aftertaste. I find that if I don't have like a toothbrush... No. ...and I... I decide to eat that shit, then it's really disgusting. You like it, all right? I do like it. Fuck yeah. What about the mixed berry? Mixed berry's good too. I like to try that.

[177:35] Yeah. I got chocolate in here. I didn't bring you a mixed berry, but I'll get you some. Okay. Yeah. I do like this one. I'm going to leave all this for you guys. What do you think? Good? It includes whey... You like it? Yeah. So we did not want to do any fiber syrups, like tapioca syrup or anything, because they give people gas. But it's really cool. Like, look, eat real food, but if you need on the go, like we wanted to make a really good protein bar. We're stoked about it. Just so much other garbage out there. So it's cool to make something healthy. Yeah. Is that the only four flavors you have? So we have those four, and then we got more coming. We're going to do eight this year. I'm trying to think of like what other flavors that are ideal. I like the birthday cake one, even though that's like... What's that? Brownie butter. Brownie butter. We got a chocolate one here. Or cookie dough without chocolate would be good. No chocolate chip cookie dough. Yeah. Just regular cookie dough. Yeah. Yeah. Something like that would be good. Some of those flavors are hard to do without a bunch of junk and artificial flavors, you know?

[178:35] Just like vanilla? Yeah. Or like... So, yeah. We've got a... I don't know. I'm probably not supposed to talk about the new flavors. We've got the new flavors we've got coming out, but... Just do it anyway. We've got... Here's a chocolate one. Let's see what you think of that. That's a little cold. They've been in the fridge. We've got a peanut butter chocolate chip coming out now. Just be impulsive and do whatever comes into your brain. That's like what I usually do. That works for you. Yeah. We've got peanut butter chocolate chip coming out. We've got some other flavors. You like that one? Brownie. But you don't like chocolate? No. You guys should make an organic condom without latex, right? Isn't that really bad? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah. So, yeah. Lineage. The protein bars here. I mean, not that I would use it, but... They have like a sheepskin condom right now, right? I don't know. Yeah. There's like a sheepskin... Wrong guy to ask. Yeah. There's a sheepskin condoms, but they don't...

[179:37] The fenestrations, the holes in the condom are too big. Holes in the condom? Yeah. There are holes in the condom. Yeah. Why are there holes in it? I feel like that's counterintuitive. Well, because I think it's made from sheep's intestines. Ew. Like, it's made from sheep's intestines. And it's... The fenestrations are small enough that sperm can't pass through, but viruses can. So, that was the big thing with sheepskin condoms is they felt less like a barrier, but they would allow the transmission of viruses. Like, STDs wouldn't be a good thing with those. Yeah. But I think we'll stick to like... We'll stick to food. I'm going to get on a maintenance dose of doxycycline. For just any STD that you get? Yeah. Really? I know a lot of people do that. Really? Yeah, they just take like 100 mg a day. For chlamydia, gonorrhea? Forever. Yeah. Well, that's honestly a pretty common prescription. Really?

[180:37] Yeah. For people that are sexually, let's say, promiscuous? I think so. Yeah. It's also prescribed for acne. Yeah? For cystic acne. Anything inflammatory. Man, I just worry. You hear so many stories of people with like Lyme disease. Lyme disease ain't shit. With Borrelia. And they get on doxycycline long term and then it destroys their gut flora. Oh, is that right? Do you ever worry about that? No. You know, like the long-term side effects of some of this stuff? Like, I would be worried about messing up my gut flora with doxycycline long term. I've been on Accutane for a while. Yeah? I know that's pretty bad for your gut. I think it's mostly, isn't it mostly like liver? Yeah. Yeah? It can be harmful, like too much for the liver, but I mean- Your liver enzymes shoot up, but mine aren't too terrible. They're okay? Yeah, because I was on like a very, very low dose. Do you- Like 7.5 mg. Do you have issues with acne if you're not on Accutane or do you do it for like- Yeah, typically. Yeah. So I'll do that. And it also makes you a lot more photosensitive. Right. So tanning is like problematic.

[181:40] Uh-huh. So something to be concerned about. Tricky. If you did not have acne, would you take Accutane? Yeah. It's way better for skin cell turnover than its topical counterpart, which is just tretinoin. So isotretinoin is obviously a systemic drug. Right. It's going to hit those deeper layers of your epidermis. So even if you didn't have acne, you would do that? Yep. Because I think acne is related a lot to diet too. So I think your skin will clear up with better diet. For sure. No, but I mean- It's going to get better. So that'll be good. It's just from an anti-aging context. It's very good for that. For the retina? For the tretinoin? Yep. Absolutely. Because all the over-the-counter topicals are just coke, in my opinion. Yeah. The skin is tricky. The skin is like my challenge because I like to be in the sun so much. Yep. And I don't want to not be in the sun. That's like my- Are you pro or anti-UV? Well, I think I'm pro-UV in the right dose as a part of whole spectrum sunlight.

[182:46] Yep. So you know this, but I recently learned this, that the studies on UV effects on skin cells on the dermis are all done with isolated ultraviolet light. There are not many studies or any that I'm aware of that are done with full spectrum sort of sunlight reproduction. So you know, sunlight is less than 9% ultraviolet. It's like 0.13 is UVB and the rest is UVA. So maybe 5% or 6% is UVA. And then the rest, like, then you've got visible spectrum. So red, orange, blue, green, violet. And then you've got, you know, the infrared spectrum. And so half of sunlight is near infrared and far infrared. And the red and infrared wavelengths are protective at the level of collagen, elastin in the DNA, whereas the UV wavelengths can be damaging. So it's an interesting idea to think, obviously getting too much sunlight will cause problems. But is there a Goldilocks dose of sunlight where you can not damage the skin, but get the

[183:51] benefits of sunlight, right? Nitric oxide, endorphins, vitamin D production in the skin, hormonal health with the sun. And then there's evidence that UV light can affect the gut flora positively. So the gut flora is a tough thing to talk about because it's like in our gut. We never think about it. But ultraviolet light on the skin can actually increase alpha diversity. So the array of different microbes in the body. So that's kind of cool. So another thing that I worry about with people that fear the sun is you, I don't think you can reproduce all the benefits of the sun with just a vitamin D capsule. No, definitely not. But the thing to mention is that you could also just wear a hat and contain all the UV exposure to your body. That's what I do generally. So yeah, then that's fine. Yeah. I think that's, I definitely agree with that more so than anything. Just as long as you keep your face protected and you're using your zinc or whatever. Yes. That's fine. It's a tallow based, it's a zinc oxide, non-nano zinc on my face in.

[184:55] I use a mineral sunscreen too, but it's also got some artificial ingredients. Uh-huh. So. But I think, yeah, like your face is the thing you want to protect the most. When I go surfing in the morning in Costa Rica, I use a zinc sunscreen on my face. And then I will wear a hat during the day now, especially just to try and protect my face. But then I get sunlight on my body and it seems like a good thing. Oh, absolutely. And then I do red light on my head. So I have a red light cap. We talked about that. Red and near infrared. Or I guess it's probably red and infrared in my head. And then I have a red light box that I use during the day just to relax and then a little before sleep and also to try and help with like fine lines and wrinkles. Okay. Yeah. I mean, I would say you definitely are aging quite well for 49. Trying. I mean, I haven't always been perfect. You know, when I was, what's interesting about this is I did my residency in Seattle. Okay. And three months of the year, Seattle was beautiful.

[185:55] And for eight or nine months of the year, it was kind of gloomy. And I made the mistake of going in tanning beds. Oh, yeah. Very carcinogenic. When I was in Seattle. But what's interesting about a tanning bed, right, is it's pure UV wavelengths. Correct. So now we've taken away the visible spectrum of the sun and the red and infrared. So I don't know if it would be interesting to see if somebody could make a, I guess people do make sun lamps. Could you make a sun lamp? That has UV light that mimics the sun as much as possible, but also visible wavelengths and red and infrared. And would that be better for humans? Obviously used in moderate doses. But I think I increased the aging in my skin on my face and systemically for, with a few months of like tanning beds in Seattle. I didn't know, you know. Well, I mean, that is what it is. I never was one to use the tanning beds, but I do like to certainly wake up to the sun. So the visible light is huge. Yeah.

[186:56] It's so important. Do you do that first thing in the morning when you wake up? Um, what? Go out in the sunlight? Yeah. No, I'll just put my blinds open. Oh. Usually. It's not enough. No? No. There's a luxe gap. It's called the luxe cliff. Okay. So I was- What if you go out on your balcony? Perfect. That's good. Yeah. Because you really need 50,000 to 100,000 luxe. And in your house, because, you know, your iris is going to expand and contract in your eye, it may seem bright, but it's not bright enough to trigger the changes in your brain. So you need to go outside. And you don't need to look directly at the sun. But, I mean, 10 minutes of morning sunlight or just being outdoors in the morning, that's such a free, easy- Energy hack? Yes. It affects dopamine. It amplifies your cortisol awakening response in the morning. So you get your cortisol bumps in the morning when you wake up. That's good cortisol as opposed to bad chronic cortisol. You want the cortisol awakening spike. And when you go out in the sun, it amplifies it.

[187:56] And then it sets the clock for cortisol. So it helps give your body that diurnal cortisol rhythm where cortisol goes down throughout the day and bumps in the morning. So it sets the clock for cortisol. It also turns off melatonin production. So when you go outside, you stop melatonin production, which is what you want. And it stops the enzyme N-acetyltransferase, I think it's, yeah, N-acetyltransferase, I think, that is making melatonin. And then it also kicks all the adenosine out of the receptors in your brain. So the way that coffee works is by blocking the adenosine receptors. When you go out in the sun in the morning, it kicks any residual adenosine out of the receptors. We feel tired because of the accumulation of adenosine in our brains. Okay. And when you're sleeping, you sort of clean that out and you remove the adenosine from the receptors in your brain. And going in the sun kicks all that out. So you get awake, right? The brain fog goes away. It increases dopamine, increases serotonin, and then sets the melatonin timer as well.

[188:59] So it's, I mean, it's like morning sunlight. It's hard to overemphasize that, you know? Hat tip to Andrew Huberman. So. Yeah. I'm a Huberman fan. I used to watch him while I was like taking the psychedelics for a while. So I was watching his podcast. I'll try to do something with him eventually, but he's pretty big. So. No, he would be, that would be a fun thing to see. Yeah. I don't know. I feel like you wouldn't probably agree with a lot of my stuff, but it just depends on what your goals are, right? Well, you guys could have interesting conversation about it. Yeah. I think so. No, I know Andrew pretty well. He's a good guy. He's doing, he's super, super smart. So yeah. I mean, he's been really helpful for people understanding the importance of morning sunlight, but that's, that's critical. Yeah. So go outside on your balcony in the morning, 10 minutes, super important. Is there a way to replicate the UV with like those sun lamps and stuff? Not well, maybe. So like the morning. Staring at like a UV lamp. Well, the morning sunlight is not so much for UV, right?

[189:59] It's just for bright. Yeah. Full spectrum light. They're the violet wavelengths. So the near UV and the violet, which is probably what you're going to get in the morning. There's not a whole lot of UV in the morning, which is what you want kind of. Yeah. Depending what time you're waking up. Um, the violet wavelengths are important for the serotonin and the dopamine in your brain. But, um, there are some sun lamps that I think it's called a spare tea that do have some UV, but I don't know if they have the visible spectrum. Okay. Or I guess they have some visible spectrum. I don't know how much red and infrared they have, but you know what you could do potentially, maybe you could take something like a spare tea lamp and then stack a red light next to it with like infrared and you could like try and get like spare tea UV plus red and infrared. You know, you could like do two lamps together or something. Yeah. I don't think it would be super necessary because I mean, I have a balcony that's like, yeah, you get outside. Yeah. So.

[191:08] Yeah. Okay. goes the 테 이건은 의 tysią crít� Census값이 곧 issue 이런In more, 음의 비겨진 Thank you. Thank you.

[192:34] Thank you. Thank you.

[193:34] Thank you. Thank you.

[194:34] Thank you. Thank you.

[195:34] Thank you. Thank you.

[196:34] Thank you. Thank you.

[197:34] Thank you. Thank you.

[198:34] Thank you. Thank you.

[199:34] Thank you. Oh, I did tell her I was gonna call her before. I did tell her that. Thank you.

[200:44] Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.

[202:14] Thank you. Thank you.

[203:14] Thank you. No. Yeah.

[204:44] Thank you. Thank you. I'm going to go down and try these coconuts.

[206:14] I'm going to get a coconut open. I know you have this. I don't care.

[207:44] Okay. red cups, dude. Yeah.

[209:14] sweet. got it. Yeah, almost there.

[210:44] Yeah. good thing. questions for us.

[212:14] You don't think I can do that. Yeah. Take him to the club.

[214:14] good basal metabolism. We weigh about the same. I'm like, or actually I'm- You've gotta weigh more than me now. Yeah, now, but like there was a time probably like a month or two ago where I was like 170. What do you weigh now? Probably like closer to 180. Nice. Like 178. Yeah, you're gaining some muscle, that's good. Yeah, packing on some size. That's what you want. They said, is this the dude who advocates for carnivore diet? Yeah, back in the day. Yes. He watches updated stuff. Do you have like an update like mega video that you- You know, if you go on my YouTube channel, there's videos about like animal based. There's actually videos of what I eat in a day on my YouTube channel. So those are the best like ones to start watching? Yeah, like what I eat in a day, day in the life on my YouTube channel. You should make like a playlist of like the, your best videos for people to start watching. Yeah. But yeah, carnivore diet is super helpful for people, especially if you have autoimmune disease. A carnivore reset, just eating meat and eggs for like a week, two, three, four weeks. That's great.

[215:14] But you know, long term, I think you want to add a few more foods. Start with fruit. Okay. So meat and fruit is a good elimination diet, but yeah. Sweet. Okay, let's see what else we have. A dating show for Paul. Would you rather gain muscle or gain? Oh, okay. They almost, they almost got me there. Dude, I have the questions are always like trying to get me to say something stupid. I will check it out. Okay. They're going to check out the red 40. Oh yeah. That's a, that's a buzzword. Red 40. Yeah. For sure. Yeah. I mean, I think there's studies. I'm pretty sure. Is there red 40 in this? There probably is. Probably. There probably is. Yeah. Red 40 causes like more attention deficit symptoms, more behavioral symptoms. So if you have issues with attention, attending, I would avoid red 40. I don't think we fully understand what that dye does in humans. I would just avoid food dyes in general.

[216:14] Yeah. Yeah. No, certainly. I mean, I usually have a little bit of this pre-workout every day, but you know, it's, that'll be the last thing to go. I'll focus on like the ultimate evils first. Yeah. Which is like not drinking alcohol. Yes. Like not doing drugs and like, then I'll get to the red 40. Yes. It doesn't have to be the first thing. Yeah. Cause if you try to like go all in on like just changing every single element of your life at once, it just doesn't work. It's too much. I think you can start with, like you said it when we were at Whole Foods earlier, start with macros. Yeah. You know, make sure you're getting enough protein, preferably from whole food animal sources. Get good quality carbohydrates, sweet potatoes, potatoes, fruit, squash. Be careful with the grains unless you're, you know, you know, you're okay with the grains. Stay away from sugar. Get fat along with your food. A lot of times people don't really have to think about fat. It just comes with your meat. Correct. And then once you do the macros, you know, think about food quality and then start eliminating things like carrageenan or red 40.

[217:15] Yeah. That's why with the whole thing of weightlifting, people will go in the gym sometimes with a beginner showing them what to do and they'll show them all these advanced techniques and just overload them with information to where they never want to do it again because they just perceive it as this super complex thing. But if you just tell someone, go in the gym and just do random shit and figure it out and eventually you'll kind of figure out the form and stuff. I prefer that. Yeah. I mean, yeah. Like the gym, basic movements, start with basic movements, right? Start with basic macros. Go from there. You don't have to be rigging up like a D handle to like the pull and do this weird movements. No, no. No, I mean in the gym. It's all silly. So I think, I mean, we didn't really talk about this, but I think, and you can let me know if you agree with this. I think you could go into the gym and do pushups, pullups, air squats, and just like standing jumps in 15 minutes and that's so much better than nothing. Right. Pushup. I mean, you can do most of that. If you had a pull-up bar, you can almost get a full workout with the floor and a pull-up bar. Correct. You can do pushups, deep squats, and pull-ups.

[218:17] That's a great start. You can do more, obviously, but that's just simple movements. Win. The chat didn't say this, but I'm wondering your position on chicken and turkey. They're great. I like red meat more. I don't know if that's because red meat often has more fat and I find it more rewarding. More nutrients. Maybe. I think red meat does have more nutrients, but chicken and turkey are plenty. They're very nutrient rich also. Yeah. You don't have anything wrong with it. You just prefer meat. No. It's harder to find high quality chicken and turkey. I can go to a butcher and I can say, I want grass-fed meat. If you wanted the best meat, you can go, okay, I want grass-fed beef. And that cow ate grass its whole life, which is what a cow is supposed to eat. There's nothing wrong, really, with grain-finished meat. I just think grass-finished meat is better for humans, better for the planet, if you care about that. But it's hard to find really well-raised chicken. We were talking about it with the eggs. Most chicken is such a commodity.

[219:17] They're such small animals that you have to pack them together to raise them on scale to make it profitable. Right. So that's just hard, you know? But chicken and turkey are fine. They're animal foods. They're super nutrient rich. If you like chicken and turkey more than beef, great. Like my fiance, she's on a chicken and turkey, on a chicken and fish kick right now. Rock and roll. That's fine. Fish. Do you do tilapia or anything like that? I don't do any fish because I don't like the way it tastes and I worry about the heavy metals. I think that if you want to do fish, just be aware that some fish are higher in heavy metals than others. Tuna, halibut, bigger fish, more heavy metals. Wild salmon better. Yeah. But not perfect. No fish is perfect. Exactly. We've just polluted the ocean, unfortunately. And to be fair. If you want to eat fish, go to some of these Miami nightclubs. I'll tell you the truth. You know what I mean? What, they serve sushi? No. Not exactly. But yeah, I mean, I like chicken just because it's a lot leaner. And that can work.

[220:18] Or you can get really lean ground beef. Or you could get a really lean steak. Like 93.7? You could get 93.7 ground beef. You could get a cut of meat like a tenderloin. Yep. And that's going to be a much leaner cut than like a New York. I mean, a New York is actually not that fatty if you cut off the sort of fatty cap. Yeah. It almost works out to where like if you want to bulk or be at a deficit versus, you know, get leaner, you could just kind of just do like a replacement of like beef to chicken. You could. And then you don't have to really adjust any other metrics. And that'll put you like at a perfect fucking deficit. Or you could just do leaner beef or something. Yeah, exactly. So I'd rather just tweak that. Yeah. Anything. Yeah. I just think, I mean, do you like chicken? Yeah, I do. Yeah. I think chicken's good. If it's prepared correctly. But like a lot of the times homemade chicken just, it's not done right. It's pretty dry. It's hard. Yeah. It's very hard to make chicken. I mean, that steak we had today was, I thought it was really good. Yeah, I thought it was, it was all right.

[221:20] I mean, I think just was a little too, too rare for me. Yeah. Yeah. But if you prefer that. I thought it was awesome. They did a good job. I like a more medium well type of situation. Next time we go back, we can have them cook it more for you, I'm sure. Yeah. Okay. They would cook it more. But I like the other place that he has, Gecko. I don't know. Which is like, I mean, do you go to any of these restaurants around here in Miami? I haven't been to many restaurants in Miami, man. I was, no. Do you find it difficult to get food that's like within your guidelines? A little bit, but I don't want, but not everybody is as strict as I am, you know? It's like, we talked about this. I'm kind of, that's like where my brain, you know, is like pretty strict and kind of, you know, I'm just very focused on that, very disciplined. That's just where I feel best mentally. So there are restaurants in town that I could go to, but if I were going to go to a restaurant like Paul Saladino, I would just go and look for like a good quality steak. I would make sure they cook it clean without seed oils, maybe on a grill.

[222:22] And I would probably just eat a steak. I just want to eat clean meat. If I go to a restaurant, I'm not going to get something with sauces because there's just too much in there. Right. Exactly. For me. But that's just me. Also, like people used to ask questions all the time at restaurants, like whether food was like, you know, sometimes they ask if the steak was like grass fed and all the servers will just bullshit where I used to work. They used to just say, yeah, it's organic, you know? So they'll ask sometimes, is it homemade or is it store bought? It's like, it's always fucking homemade. Yeah. It's just like, so they'll, sometimes they'll just lie to you. If you ask them if they cook it in seed oils, they'll just say no, but it is. Yeah. I'm sure that happens sometimes. I'm sure it does. I mean, like, look, like restaurants are not the worst thing in the world. It's people, it's fun to go to restaurants. Is it? I fucking hate it. You don't like it? No. I think that it's interesting. Like it's a good ambiance. You know, I like to see the artistry of it. I like, I like to see the, the decoration and if they can create a good atmosphere, but

[223:25] it's hard to find a good one. Do you like any of them in Miami? I mean, I like the food a lot. I think it's much better than obviously doing like anything homemade, but I'm sorry. There's like bugs everywhere. But like, it's just about timing, right? So like, obviously if you're going out to eat at a restaurant every single day, it's just like, it takes usually an hour and a half. It takes a long time. And that's, uh, that's pretty brutal. Yeah. I mean, you could just cook some eggs here. Yeah. So that's just usually what I opt for versus like it being a whole thing where you have to get ready. Cause a lot of these places have like pretty brutal dress codes. You don't like taking girls there on dates? Cause I feel like... I mean, I do it on streams, but like not usually too often outside of that. Uh, I don't really go out to restaurants, but I go pretty often on stream just cause it's like content, you know, it's a good setting. It is a good setting for the content. Yeah. I feel like it's a good... Restaurants are a good date in general, I guess. No, I'm... No, you disagree? Yeah. I wouldn't really say so. What would you rather do on a date? Do you go on dates? No.

[224:26] No, not really. Not anymore. Not anymore. But like where you're doing some... I mean, I used to do restaurants a lot, but unless you're like super neurotypical, it winds up being like a fuck up in my opinion, cause you're forced to literally sit there and converse for sometimes an hour and a half. And if you run out of conversation or if it becomes awkward at any point, that's just brutal where there's like nothing to distract from the conversation, like an activity or something seems a lot more logical to me. Yeah. I locked in. I just know that girls like it. I think they just like to finesse a free dinner out of people. Fair. Yeah. To be honest with you, I think that's what it's about. Because they can't afford to go to most of these nice places in Miami themselves, so they just make a guy pay for it. So they're more than happy to go out to dinner. Yeah. I think women like the sort of the show of it too, which is fair. I think that, you know, women want to feel taken care of at some level. So if you can show them something nice, they're going to enjoy it. I know. Yeah.

[225:26] But usually I, um, I'll, it just gets to a point where you're like SMB is high enough where you don't have to do like shit like that. Kind of just invite girls over. Uh-huh. It's a lot easier. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I, in my history, I would much rather spend time with like my girlfriend, my fiancee and previous one that I dated like in nature, but that's just me. In nature? Yeah. We'd go for walks or go swimming in the ocean or- That's fun. Go for bike rides. I mean, I don't know if you ever go over to Miami Beach, but like there's a great bike trail over there and just riding bikes on the trail is fun. I should get a bike. That's, that's a good idea. I want to get a golf cart too. Yeah. Take that around. That'd be pretty fucking fun. I don't know how it is out here, but yeah, golf carts are cool. But they, you know, they rent bikes over there in Miami Beach. You can take a city bike and just ride on the path. That's fun. It's just interesting. People watching. You can stop, jump in the ocean. My favorite thing to do though on the water is speed boats. Um, I don't really like yachts too much because it's just like, you can't really feel the water, but going on speed boats is a lot of fun.

[226:26] I've never been on a super fast boat. I usually just go on wake boats. I mean, I've never been on anything too crazy either, but just like, you know, your standard like smaller boat with a decent engine will go pretty fast. They've got some crazy boats here, dude. I don't know if you've seen them. I think people have like these like real speed boats. I've never been on like anything insane. Yeah. But I certainly would want to try because you can't really, you have to go like pretty far out though or else the coast guard will fuck with you. If you go too fast. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I went out here one time with some friends and I think we went right, I don't know if it was this inlet that we went out, but we went, uh, it might've been, but we went out. There's like a lighthouse out here, like 12 miles offshore. Really? Yeah. You can, we took a boat out to the lighthouse and just, you can swim around the light. It's this old, abandoned, rusty lighthouse in the middle of the ocean. There's all kinds of crazy stuff out here in Miami, dude. That's interesting. The Bahamas are like an hour away depending on the boat. Yeah. About two hours. Yeah. Depending how fast the boat is. You got to get down there, man. For real. Yeah. Rent a boat. Do it. Yeah. There's great stuff out there like the Exumas and stuff.

[227:27] But anyway, I mean, I'd be down to do something, um, you know, this next coming days on the water, wake surfing, whatever. Yeah. Come out with us. Yeah. We'll go out. Um, but did you have any, uh, closing thoughts you wanted to? No, man. Thanks for hanging out. All right. I'm stoked for you to, I'm stoked for you to like get healthy. I think that like, I think it's cool that you're showing people your evolution, you know? Because like you said earlier in the stream, I don't know if people saw this. We met, I guess, over a year ago in Los Angeles. And, uh, you know, you've, you've evolved a lot. You've had a lot of exposure since then. You've evolved a lot. And I'm excited for the health phase that you're going through. Yeah. For sure. And eating better food. I mean, this is a great example that we were able to go grocery shopping and show people the food because I think you're going to feel better and you're going to look better when you eat better food. And I love what you said earlier. Like you're not hungry right now. You're full because you're not eating like processed food. It's so much easier to do it. But if you can just eat good quality food, it's, it's really worth it. And I think that like, you're, you're an example for a lot of people and this is a great

[228:30] example to set. So I'm stoked. Oh yeah. Yeah, sure. All right. Well, there it is. Thanks brother. We have a Dr. Paul Saladino. Thank you for joining. Yeah. And.
