TITLE: Never Buy These Egg Brands in 2026 (Get THIS Instead)
VIDEO ID: SPaqnDv-qmQ
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SPaqnDv-qmQ
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-06-05
DURATION: 15:04
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] The shell egg industry in the United States is almost $50 billion. That's crazy. And within the industry, there's an expression, "An egg is an egg is an egg." Do you think that's true? No, this is not the case at all. Eggs are totally different based on how the chickens are living and what they're eating. Right here, I've got a pasture-raised egg from that coop, and this is a store-bought egg. These are the same food, they're both eggs. Completely different nutrition between these two eggs. By the end of this video, you're going to understand why. And you're going to understand what the egg industry is doing to make sure you never find out the difference between these two, but it's massive. So, here's what I want to do today, guys. I want to show you three things >> >> that most people will never learn about eggs. But to really understand all of this, we have to start with what happened to eggs in the first place, and how a multi-billion dollar shelled egg industry turned real food into a marketing scam. Now, I want to be careful here, because the simple version of this story is big brand bad, small farm good. But it's not always that simple. So, let's talk about Vital

[01:01] Farms, the biggest pasture-raised egg brand in the United States, because their story actually tells you something about how the system works. Vital Farms was started in 2007 by a gentleman named Matt O'Haire. He started it on a 27-acre farm in Austin, Texas with 20 chickens on pasture. In the beginning, he wasn't a guy trying to build a big corporate brand. He was a guy who looked at chickens and thought, "These animals have personalities. They get happy, they get sad. When you shove them into cages, it's not good for them." He sold the eggs from his farm at a local farmers market in Austin for $4 a dozen, unheard of at the time. People thought he was crazy, but he wasn't crazy, and the business took off. His eggs were simply better quality than what people could get in the store. Matt's small business selling truly pasture-raised eggs started to grow. Between 2007 and 2015, he expanded and kept building farms. By 2015, he had 50 farms, and then things really took off. Between 2015 and 2023, Vital Farms expanded to over 300 farms across nine

[02:03] different states. It hit $465 million in yearly revenue and went public in 2020. They became the second largest egg brand in the United States at retail. Once Vital Farms went public, they had shareholders. When shareholders want 35% growth year-over-year, you need more chickens, more eggs, more stores, more farms. That's hard to scale. What began as a 27-acre farm with 20 chickens is hard to replicate that quality >> >> when you need to scale at that rate, especially when some of your biggest investors are private equity firms like BlackRock, State Street, Vanguard. In fact, today the original owners of Vital Farms own a small share of the company, 14%. That's significantly less than the private equity firms that have 20-plus percent of the company. Private equity firms, maybe don't care so much about quality. Small farmers in the beginning, they love quality. Things came to a head in 2025 when there were pretty striking revelations testing the quality of Vital Farms eggs. People measured the linoleic acid content of the eggs. That's this omega-6 polyunsaturated fat that's

[03:05] common in corn and soy. They found that Vital Farms eggs had 20 to 23% linoleic acid, significantly higher than what you would expect to find in an egg on chickens that are truly raised on pasture. This revelation that Vital Farms eggs had significant levels of linoleic acid led to further investigation. People flew drones over their farms, and what did they see? weren't really raising their chickens on pasture the way they were supposed to be. They got exposed. The point is this, when a company goes from 27 acres and 20 chickens to over 300 farms across nine states and half a billion dollars in revenue, the shareholders are going to bend the company in the wrong direction, and quality is going to decline, and this pasture-raised label is going to get abused. My intention here is not to make you frustrated about every egg you've ever bought, every egg you've ever hard-boiled or scrambled. Remember, any egg is better than no egg. Eggs are incredibly nutritious. Before the end of this video, I'm going to give you a full ranking for what I think are the best to worst eggs to help you buy eggs in a grocery store. The really important thing to understand here is the

[04:06] nutrition in eggs because what's in an egg is more important than what's on the label. This yolk right here, the yolk of an egg, is the single most nutritious part of an egg. The yolk really contains all the vitamins that make an egg special. Fat-soluble vitamins, vitamins A, D, E, and K, B vitamins like folate, omega-3 fatty acids, DHA, EPA, a little bit of DPA. Egg yolks also contain minerals like phosphorus and selenium and flavonoids like lutein and zeaxanthin, which have been associated with better eye health and overall health in general. It contains choline, a nutrient that 90% of humans are deficient in, a nutrient essential for infant brain development and adult brain development, and it's in the egg yolk. Egg yolks are the best source of that. Yolk is the prize in an egg, and the fact that an entire generation was told to throw it away and eat cereal like All-Bran instead is a failure of the complete nutritional paradigm that we've been operating in for the last 70 to 80 years. Most of us had thought that the color of an egg yolk was the best determining factor for the quality of the egg. Not really so. I

[05:07] mean, look at these two eggs. This one is factory farmed, and this one is pasture-raised. The eggs look about the same color. If you want to know how good the quality of your egg is, you look at two things. You look at the egg white and look at the the yolk inside here. You can see here this pasture-raised egg has a much more viscous egg white than a store-bought egg. The white is completely runny, and then look at the yolks on these two eggs, guys. This pasture-raised egg has a much more plump and robust yolk. It's standing up higher. This factory-farmed egg has kind of a weak, thin membrane, and it's a more spread-out yolk that's lower on the plate. With an industry that's $50 billion, they're getting eggs in, they're getting eggs out, they're getting chickens in, they're getting chickens out. They just want to make as many eggs as possible. And if you walk into a grocery store, you'll never know the difference between a good quality egg and a poor quality egg because let's face it, eggs look the same from the outside. And when you go into a grocery store, you see a bunch of labels. Cage-free, free range,

[06:07] pasture-raised, organic, regenerative. These labels are meant to make you feel good about buying eggs. They don't all reflect chickens that are living in a good way. I'm going to break this down for you guys right now and tell you what these labels really mean and tell you which labels you want to look for if you want to get good quality eggs in the grocery store. The most common type of eggs, conventional eggs. You may not know this, but conventionally raised chickens that make conventional eggs, they spend their life in cages in warehouses. Each chicken gets less than 67 square inches. That's less than the size of a sheet of paper. So, these conventional eggs are not that great. The chickens never go outside. There's a belt underneath the chickens that moves the eggs away from them. They're never outside in the sun. They're never moving around and they're fed a diet of exclusively chicken feed, which is mostly corn and soy and often seed oils or other additives can be mixed into that conventional chicken feed. You can bet it's not organic and you can bet that those chickens are basically eating the equivalent of dog food kibble. So, they're getting chicken kibble >> >> and that's going to affect the quality of the eggs they make. You might be thinking, "Okay, I get it. I don't like

[07:08] conventionally raised eggs from conventionally raised chickens. That's inhumane. That's why I buy cage-free eggs." But do you really know what cage-free means? Cage-free isn't that much better. So, cage-free, yes, the chickens are not in cages, but they are all crammed into a warehouse with basically not a whole lot more space per chicken. So, they're never outside, they're never in the fresh air, they're never rooting and pecking, they're never eating bugs or worms. They're still eating the same stuff. They're eating corn and soy mixed with seed oils and other additives. And yeah, it's better that they're out of a cage. That's slightly more humane, but they're all packed into a massive warehouse. Look at this chicken coop right here. There's tons of space for these chickens to move around and as you'll see these chickens get let out onto the pasture to move around as well. So, completely different experience for chickens like this versus cage-free chickens. So, that cage-free label that you think is good is actually just really. And it's not really much better than normal conventional chickens in cages. So, then you might think, "Oh, free-range. That sounds good, right? They're free-range. They get to go outside, right?" Well,

[08:09] technically, yes. But let me tell you how free-range works. They start in a warehouse and they technically have access to the outdoors. All there has to be is a little door in the side of the warehouse where the chickens can pop outside into who knows what. The outdoors could be a slab of concrete. So, yes, it's better than cage-free and conventional, but these chickens are still not really necessarily on pasture. They're still eating probably exclusively corn and soy with seed oils and other additives. And they only get 2 square feet >> per bird. >> So, that's crazy. So, conventional pretty inhumane for chickens. Cage-free, ugh, not good. Free-range, still not that great. So, what about the organic label? Is that any better? Well, sort of. That just means organic feed. So, organic doesn't necessarily mean the chicken has any high quality of life. It just tells you about the feed of the chicken. Still not really telling you much. And you'll see it in the grocery store. You can see organic cage-free, which means they're still in a warehouse. They're still packed in. They're just getting organic feed. Not great. Organic

[09:10] free-range, yeah, still in a warehouse. Organic corn and soy, a door on the side that leads you to who knows what. So, organic doesn't really tell you anything about the quality of the chicken's life. It just tells you about the fact that the feed, which is usually still bad, is free from pesticides. A small step in the right direction, but we're still not there. Compare this chickens eating on the land outdoors, fresh air, sunlight Here they come. Looking for bugs and worms to what you see in a cage free factory where they're shoulder to shoulder or outdoors on a concrete slab or free range, they don't really have any space. So, this is the way chickens are supposed to be, just actually free range. That's the spirit of that term. It's pasture-raised. These chickens have hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of square feet per chicken because this is a 5-acre property and there's only 20 chickens here, but yeah, they're just going to be around rooting and pecking looking for bugs and worms. Who knows what they're going to find today? All kinds of good stuff. So, you might think aren't there inspectors

[10:11] looking at pasture-raised farms checking to see the quality of the pasture, checking the eggs, checking to see how much room the chickens have? No. When the inspectors come to pasture-raised farms, they're checking for temperature of storage of these eggs and they're checking the label. That's it. So, they're actually not checking to make sure that every chicken has 108 square feet of space, none of that. They're checking the logistics of the egg production. They're not checking the quality of the chickens' lives or the quality of the eggs. So, what actually determines the quality of an egg? It all has to do with what the chicken is eating. Chickens outside on pasture eating bugs and worms or eating good quality feed, these are going to make better quality eggs. Eggs like this from chickens like this that are living outdoors, that are eating good quality feed, these are going to make eggs with harder shells, >> >> higher yolks, and thicker whites. If you're buying pasture-raised eggs in a

[11:12] grocery store, you're going to want to see an egg that has a very plump yolk and a very thick white indicating that the chickens are actually outdoors. The linoleic acid content, this omega-6 polyunsaturated fatty acid >> >> content of a chicken egg yolk is dependent on what the chicken is eating. If a chicken is eating what wild chickens are supposed to eat, bugs and worms, maybe even mice from time to time. The omega-6 linoleic acid content of an egg yolk is going to be lower. And when you feed a chicken corn and soy, which are kind of artificially high in omega-6, the omega-6 content of the yolk becomes higher. Eating food that's eating food that it's not supposed to eat is not the best idea, which is why it's important what your chickens are eating. What are these chickens right here eating? Look at this. At my friend's farm, this is a fermented bamboo. Maybe a little bit of corn mixed in there. So, this is a lower linoleic acid feed than you're going to get. It's not pure corn and soy. There's a few grains mixed in here along with fermented bamboo. You might have seen this label on eggs, vegetarian fed. But,

[12:15] that's that's kind of a red flag. Chickens are not vegetarians. They're clearly omnivorous. Okay, so top tier, the S tier, know your farmer. You can go to a farm, if you can see how the chickens are raised, if you can meet the farmer, shake his or her hand, and see what the chickens are fed, how they're on pasture. A lot of these farms actually move the chickens every day. S tier, those are the best. Presumably, they're not fed corn and soy. You can talk to your farmer about that. Next, you've got the A tier. So, this is where you get into organic, pasture-raised eggs in the grocery store. And when you're looking for eggs in the grocery store, look for some sort of third-party certification, humane, pasture-raised certification, actually certified for pasture-raised. That means they have 108 square feet of grazing space. This means that they're actually outside. The quality is certified, not like what happened with Vital Farms. B tier is pasture-raised in the grocery store, but it's not actually certified. Some brands have been co-opted by being bought partially by BlackRock, and the quality goes down. But, there are good brands of

[13:15] pasture-raised eggs in the grocery store. Just look for something that's organic, pasture-raised. It may not be third-party certified, but it's still pretty good. C tier, organic, free-range, some outdoor access, not a whole lot of space, but they're at least getting organic feed. They're not being fed GMO grains, so genetically modified grains. Presumably, they're not getting grains that have pesticides on them. So, that's the C tier. Then, you've got the D tier. So, this isn't ideal, but look, eggs are a very nutritious food for humans. If all you can afford is cage-free eggs, that's fine. Think about what works for your budget, but understand that there's a wide range here. Cage-free, they're not in cages technically in the factory like we talked about, but no outdoor access, eating corn and soy. In the F tier, they're in the cages with the belt underneath them that's moving their eggs away. Not a super humane way to contain chickens, not a super great egg to eat, but again, getting animal foods in your diet is the goal. Don't let perfect be the enemy of good. Any eggs, even conventional F tier eggs, are going to be better than no eggs.

[14:16] Ultimately, eggs are food for humans at any price point. So, here's what I want you to take away from this. Eggs, food for humans. Humans have always known that eggs are valuable food. They've nourished us for hundreds of thousands of years. But, a $50 industry took something simple and made it complicated. If you want to thrive, eat single-ingredient foods like eggs and meat and milk and vegetables and fruit. If you're struggling with health issues, weight loss, or autoimmune issues, and you're not sure how to eat, there is an eating guide on my website, paulsaladinomd.com. I hope this video on eggs has been helpful for you, and I hope you'll share it with someone, >> >> your friends, your family, who maybe even fear eggs, but shouldn't fear eggs, and need to know how to find and test the best eggs possible. See you guys in the next video.
