TITLE: The Stubborn Fat Solution
AUTHOR: Lyle McDonald
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-15
PAGE COUNT: 97
======================================================================

[p.1] LUTION

RECOMPOSITION

SAAT AS ROAR OTM Orne

[p.2] The Stubborn Fat
Solution

Lyle McDonald

[p.3] This book is not intended for the treatment or prevention of disease, nor as a
substitute for medical treatment, nor as an alternative to medical advice. It is a
review of scientific evidence presented for information purposes only. Use of the
guidelines herein is at the sole choice and risk of the reader.

Copyright: © 2008 by Lyle McDonald. All rights reserved.

This book or any part thereof, may not be reproduced or recorded in any form
without permission in writing from the publisher, except for brief quotations
embodied in critical articles or reviews.

For information contact:
Lyle McDonald Publishing
PO Box 1713

Salt Lake City, UT 84110

Email: lylemcd@comcast.net
Cover and interior book design by Jazz Kalsi

Email: jkalsi@gmail.com
Cover model: Tommy Jeffers

ISBN: 0-9671456-7-8

FIRST EDITION
FIRST PRINTING

[p.4] Acknowledgments

I want to thank the people who helped me to test out the Stubborn Fat Protocol 2.0.
Borge Fagerli (aka Blade online) tested it with many of his fitness and bodybuilding clients, as did
Martin Berkham. Both provided valuable input that went into this book.

Extra special thanks to Tommy Jeffers (aka Sporto) who not only tested the SFP2.0 but also
appears on the cover of this book.

Of course, thanks goes out to Sarah, who helped me with editing.

Finally, I want to thank my good friend Elzi Volk. I mention her later in the book but
many of the ideas in this book probably wouldn’t exist if not for her passion for the topic along
with the endless conversations she and I had about it.

[p.5] Table of Contents

Introduction

Chapter 1:Defining the ProDleM...........cccssssesseeseesseeeeenesseneeseneseneeenseneneeeeees 1
Chapter 2:What is Body Fat .........cccsssescsssssesesscsseseeesessseesesseseesesecaeseesessenesseeeenes 5
Chapter 3:Types Of BOdY Fat ........ccccsscsessssessensesessseesesensessesesessenessesesssseeeseseesees 13
Chapter 4:Basic Fat Cell Metabolism..............ccsscessesseseeeessensesseesesseseesesseenees 21
Chapter S:Burning Body Fat...........cccsssscssesssessesssesseseceeseeseeseeseeseeneenenensesseeeeees 27
Chapter 6:Hormones and Body Fat.........cccccescsssssesesesseeseeseenecnseesseneceeessensenee 33
Chapter 7:Why is Stubborn Fat StuDDOrn ..........cccccseseeeteeseeeessenseeereseeseneeeeees 45
Chapter 8:Diet, Exercise and Supplement ............c:cccccsscsseseesseessesseeseseeeseeaeees 51
Chapter 9:The Stubborn Fat Protocols: IntrOductiON...........ccccseseeeeeeseeeees 63
Chapter 10:The Protocols .........ccscccesssssessssesesseeeeseseseseesesesensesenenenensnsesaseeneeesnees 69
Chapter 11:The End...........ccccecccceeceeeeeceneeceeeeeeeeeeeeaeeeesaeeesseeeeessaeeesenges 83 ;

REFETCIICES........ceccececcececcececsccececncseececeseceeeeeeeeececeeeecneeeceeceeeeneseseeeeee ones 85

[p.6] Introduction

For decades (if not longer), bodybuilders and those seeking what they consider an ideal
physique have struggled with the issue of stubborn body fat. Females have typically had
the biggest problems leaning out their legs. As Dan Duchaine commented years ago in
Bodyopus, it’s not at all uncommon to see a female bodybuilder who looks like she’s had
two different half-bodies stapled together. She’ll be ripped up top with smooth (a polite
way of saying ‘too damn fat’) legs. Even non-bodybuilding females who only want to get
athletically lean often end up losing all of the fat from their upper bodies, while their lower
bodies don’t change at all.

Men, under a variety of circumstances, can run into the same issues. Abdominal and low-
back fat along with the obliques are often a problem. While not nearly as stubborn as
female lower body fat, men’s stubborn fat can still be tough to get rid of. Some men have
fat deposition patterns more like a woman’s to begin with; losing lower body fat is just as
difficult for them as it is for females.

As with so many aspects of physique enhancement, there is a lot of lore and outright
bullshit when it comes to the topic of stubborn body fat and what to do about it.
Estrogen is all too commonly blamed for female stubborn fat problems, cortisol gets blamed
for ab fat. If things were that simple, all it would take is an anti-estrogen or an anti-cortisol
compound to get rid of it. In the real world, while this may help a bit, it doesn’t cause
magic to happen. Ergo, those are not the real problems.

Rather, stubborn body fat is stubborn for a myriad of interconnected physiological reasons
which, over the past several years, research has helped to delineate. Stubborn fat not only
stores calories more effectively, but it is hellishly resistant to giving it up. That’s why it’s
stubborn.

To understand how to get rid of stubborn body fat, first we have to understand what
causes it and why it’s there in the first place. This means that, as usual, I’m going to bore
you with a lot of background physiology about body fat and stubborn body fat specifically.
If you’ve already read my Ultimate Diet 2.0, some of it will sound familiar but I’m going
to go into much more detail here.

If you learn nothing else from my physiological ramblings, you’ll at least learn why one of
the single most common approaches to stubborn lower body fat is also one of the most
ineffective. Put differently, what often works at least adequately for men’s stubborn
abdominal fat is generally utterly worthless for targeting lower body fat. I don’t usually
feel that there are huge differences in how men and women should train or diet, but
getting rid of lower body fat is one area where there are differences that must be
appreciated for optimal results. :

After I dissect the physiology of stubborn body fat in my typical obsessive way, I’m going
to present four separate approaches to dealing with stubborn body fat. This simply reflects
the fact that not every solution is appropriate for every individual. How you're training,
your dietary and supplement preferences, and other factors have to be taken into
consideration to determine which of the four approaches is going to be best.

[p.7] Many of you may have come across mention of the Stubborn Fat Protocol (SFP) on the
Internet. Sometimes folks are even decent enough to credit me and call it Lyle
McDonald’s SFP. That, along with two other approaches are already somewhat commonly
known. However, in this book I'll introduce the newly developed Stubborn Fat Protocol
2.0 which no one outside of my test subjects knows about. I'll tell you up front that the
SFP2.0 is not for everyone and not everyone can do it. For those who can handle it,
there’s nothing more effective at stripping stubborn body fat.

In any case, by the end of the book, you'll have all of the tools you need (training, diet,
supplements, etc.) to get rid of stubborn body fat once and for all.

[p.8] Defining the Problem

to address, and this one is no different. Assuming you’re reading this at home, I want
you to go get naked in front of the mirror, you might even want to jump up and
down a couple of times (for God’s sake, don’t take video and upload it to YouTube).

‘ everal of my books have started with a chapter defining the problem that I’m going

What jiggled?

If you’re a male with typical body fat patterning, the fat covering your abs (upper and
lower), love handles and lower back did. You might have amazingly striated legs but the
abs look smooth (again, a polite way of saying ‘fat’). Odds are that when you gain any fat
at all, it accumulates around your midsection. When you diet, everything else gets leaner
but the abs just never quite come in.

If you have skinfold data, it probably looks something like

Pectoral: 3 mm
Thigh: 5 mm
Abdominal: 22 mm (holy shit!)

If you’re a female with typical female fat patterning, it was the stuff on your legs that
moved. If you're semi-lean, you might have striations in your delts and even have a visible
6-pack (or at least abs). Yet the thighs remain smooth and uncut with no definition or
separation. When you gain fat, it’s mostly in the lower body; when you diet, everything
else gets ripped up but the legs just don’t drop fat. Sometimes it even seems like your
upper body is leaning out while your legs get fatter (I'll explain this later on). You may or
may not have as extreme a variance between sites as a man; typically, the thigh is the
biggest, triceps is next while suprailiac (above the hipbone) and abdominal are both fairly
small.

Now, if you’re an atypical. male, you might have lower body fat problems (if you’re very

“unlucky you might have problems with both ab fat and thigh fat). Some females show
atypical fat patterns as well, either they have abdominal fat in addition to the normal
hip/thigh fat or they have abdominal fat instead of the normal hip/thigh fat.

[p.9] Extremely overfat females can often start to develop male fat patterning (with the health
risks that go along with it). As a random tangent: am I the only one noticing that
younger girls are starting to have more ab fat these days? Something odd seems to be
going on hormonally there but I’m not sure what. Anyhow.

Now, if you’re supremely lucky, you don’t have any particular trouble spots. Rather you
carry your fat fairly evenly. When you gain weight, it doesn’t seem to accumulate in any
one place; you can carry tremendous amounts of body fat without looking particularly fat.
The advantage is that folks in this situation don’t typically have trouble spots that are
resistant to loss. The drawback is that it takes absolutely forever for any real appearance
changes to occur. Except that when it happens, it seems to happen overnight. Smooth.
Smooth. Smooth. Holy shit, I’m cut. The genetically elite are often in this category.

If you’re in that last category, with very even fat distribution and no real trouble spots, I
have two things to say to you. First, screw you. The majority of us with stubborn fat
problems hate you, deal with it. Second, you don’t need this book since you don’t have
stubborn fat problems in the first place. Not that the information won’t help you or that
you won’t get something useful out of this book, but fundamentally any old approach will
probably work just fine for you. Which is a nice segue into...

Who is this book for?

Like my Ultimate Diet 2.0 (hereafter UD2), the information in this book is not meant
for everyone. This is only for fairly lean individuals looking to get super lean. In fact, my
requirements for who needs this book are even stricter than in the UD2 (which was for
men of roughly 12-15% body fat and women around 21-24% body fat).

How lean do you need to be to need this book? For men, this will usually mean being
10% body fat or lower before needing to be concerned with this book’s approach; for
women, a body fat in the mid-teens (15-17% body fat) is probably about right. These
aren’t absolutes but are generally when the problems with removing stubborn body fat
become particularly apparent.

If you're fatter than that, you simply don’t need to worry about stubborn fat or the
protocols in this book. As you'll learn shortly, the body always takes fat from the least
stubborn places first; until you get rid of the easy stuff, there’s no point in targeting the
stubborn stuff. .

I'd note that I don’t expect the above paragraph to dissuade-people. I still get folks asking
if they can do UD2 when they are far above my body fat cutoffs; often they want to know
if the information will still ‘work’. The answer, generally, is that, yes the information will
still work. It’s simply that it’s not necessary.

I always recommend that folks use the simplest, easiest, least labor intensive approaches to
accomplishing a goal; the stubborn fat protocols are not in the category of simple, easy or
non-labor intensive. Don’t bother with them if you don’t need them; that way you'll
have them in your arsenal when you do.

[p.10] Am | talking about spot reduction?

Spot reduction refers to the idea that, with some combination of specific exercise or what
have you, the body will take fat from a specific area of the body. For example, everyone
toiling away in those hour-long ab or hip/thigh classes hopes that by doing an hour of
abdominal work, they can remove fat from the midsection. Women will often perform
hundreds of repetitions on the inner/outer thigh (aka ‘good girl/bad girl’ machine) hoping
it will trim their saddlebags. If only it were that simple.

While I’m on this topic, I should mention a recent study that a lot of people have been
trotting out as proof of the concept of spot reduction. In it, researchers found that
exercising a given muscle increased blood flow to the fat cells adjacent to that muscle. So
working the legs increased blood flow to the thigh fat. As you'll learn later in this book,
blood flow is a huge area of importance for getting rid of stubborn body fat. So why
doesn’t this study matter? The researchers estimated that 30 minutes of exercise might
mobilize an extra 1 milligram (one thousandth of a gram) of extra fat from the adjacent fat
cells. Unless you have 80 years to get lean, this simply isn’t relevant.

So am I describing spot reduction in this book?

The short answer, of course, is no. Spot reduction is an absurd myth that refuses to die
and is, fundamentally, a physiological impossibility. The protocols in this book aren’t
magically going to reduce abdominal or hip/thigh fat preferentially; that’s not what I’m
talking about.

Recall from above how I said that the body will pull fat from the easiest, non-stubborn
places first; recall also how I said that only very lean individuals need worry about the
information in this book and how to get rid of stubborn fat. This always holds and the
protocols in this book can’t change that pattern of loss. Rather, this book will facilitate
getting rid of stubborn fat more easily and readily once a dieter is to the point where it has
become an issue.

At this point you might be wondering why we even need to consider an approach to
stubborn body fat in the. first place? There are two primary reasons which are inter-
related. The first and most obvious is that individuals who need to be super lean (for
whatever reason) won’t reach their appearance goals if they can’t get rid of the fat.
Traditional diet and training often fail in this regard and there are legions of dieters who
did everything ‘right’ yet who failed to reach their fat loss goals.

But there’s a more insidious reason that stubborn fat removal becomes important. When
you're in a calorie deficit, your body needs to mobilize fuel. | Anybody who has been
super lean knows that muscle loss often accelerates near the end of the diet. There are a
number of reasons for this (see my UD2 for a detailed discussion) but an inability to
mobilize fat for fuel is one of them. Because the body can’t easily get stubborn fat to use
for fuel (and there’s no other body fat left to use), in a deficit situation it will turn to
muscle mass. You don’t get leaner, you just get smaller.

By forcing the body to mobilize stubborn body fat for fuel, not only do you get leaner
faster at the end of your diet, you spare muscle loss. This book is a targeted approach to

[p.11] eliminate body fat (after everything else is gone) that is notoriously resistant to removal.
The Stubborn Fat Solution accomplishes this by directly addressing the physiological
reasons that makes it so difficult to remove in the first place. However, the protocols in
this book will not let you side step how your body normally removes body fat.

It’s not spot reduction in any sense.

So who are you?

So who is this book for? The ideal candidate for the information in this book is a male at
10% body fat or lower and women around 15-17% body fat or lower. Obviously, you
should have your general diet and training under control and understand the basics of
each. Your goal, of course is that you’re trying to get to extreme levels of leanness and get
rid of stubborn body fat.

Usually this means folks dieting down for a bodybuilding, fitness or figure contest but this
isn’t always the case. You might be a lean female or male model who needs to get rid of
some stubborn fat. Maybe you just want to see your abs for once or are a female who
wants to see cut legs just once. Please note: getting this lean even once will screw you up
for the rest of your life; once you’ve been uber-lean anything above that feels fat.

Odds are you’ve tried other approaches, magic pills, potions and powders. Hour long ab,
hip and thigh classes, wraps, creams, etc.; you name it and people have tried it. It didn’t
work because these approaches weren’t approaching the problem in the right way. You're
reading this because the other stuff didn’t work. It goes without saying that my approach
does.

What can you expect?

As I go through this topic in my normal way, I’m going to address a variety of topics
related to diet, training and supplementation that can impact on stubborn body fat.
However, while my UD2 was very, ‘very specific and structured, you'll find that the
information in this book is a bit more flexible.

As I mentioned, I'll be covering four different approaches to targeting stubborn body fat.
Which you choose will depend on how you prefer to diet or train and which best fits your
needs. You will, of course, have to change some aspect of your training or diet to achieve
the goal of stubborn body fat loss but I imagine you’ve assumed that as par for the course.

If you’ve read through this chapter and think it describes you and your situation, read on.
If not, read on anyway; as with all of my books, even if you don’t apply a single bit of
information in this book, you'll end up knowing more about the topic than most people
on the planet.

This, of course, is primarily important in allowing you to win Internet arguments. And, at
the end of the day, isn’t that what it’s really all about?

[p.12] What is Body Fat

tell you that that isn’t the case. If you’ve read my articles, you may have seen
some of this before but I want to make sure everyone is on the same page before
I deluge you with the technical bits.

Ms: people think they know ali they need to know about body fat; I’m here to

What it is?

The more technical term for body fat is adipose tissue, with individual cells being called
adipocytes (‘adipo’ = fat; ‘cyte’ = cell). In humans, the primary type of fat cell is called
white adipose tissue, or WAT, so named because of its color (it's actually sort of a milky
yellow). While there is another type of fat, called brown adipose tissue or BAT (which is
actually more of a reddish orange), it’s generally been thought that humans didn’t have
much BAT and hence it could be ignored. As I'll discuss later, this fact has been brought
into question by recent research. I’ll come back to BAT in the next chapter.

Vd note that there is also fat stored within skeletal muscle, called intramuscular
triglycerides (IMTG) that can be used by skeletal muscle for energy. Somewhat
unfortunately, the body often burns IMTG before it will start using fatty acids from other
sources (e.g. your fat butt) for energy.

More unfortunately, the loss of IMTG is part of why dieting makes dieters look muscularly
flat as IMTG contribute to overall muscular volume. Within the bodybuilding subculture,
many contest gurus are now using something called ‘junk loading’ (combining high fat
and carbohydrate intake immediately before a contest); what they are trying to do is refill
both muscle glycogen AND IMTG levels for maximum fullness. -

Additionally, under certain conditions, the body can start storing fat in places it doesn’t
belong such as the pancreas, liver, etc. and this causes bodily damage. This generally only
occurs under conditions of out of control obesity and weight gain. I’m not going to talk
about IMTG or the fat that gets stored in the wrong places any more in this book since my
focus is on removing WAT stored in the stubborn spots.

[p.13] In humans, fat cell number can vary drastically. Lean individuals may have anywhere
from 41 to 65 billion fat cells while obese individuals can have upwards of 200 billion fat
cells; fat cell number can also vary based on genetics, race and the area of fat you’re
looking at. Contrary to popular belief, fat cell number can change up or down. Fat cells
can range in diameter from 70 to 120 micrometers (one millionth of a meter) and it turns
out that the size of the fat cell can affect its physiology.

WAT in humans is composed primarily (anywhere from 80 to 95%) of lipid. By lipid, I
mean stored triglycerides (TG) which are simply a glycerol molecule bound to three free
fatty acid (FFA) chains. The remaining part of the fat cell is comprised of a little bit of
water as well as all of the cellular machinery needed to produce the various enzymes,
proteins, and products that fat cells need to do their duty. As it's turning out, fat cells
produce quite a bit of stuff, some good, some bad, that affects your overall metabolism.

For the record, one pound of fat is 454 grams and let's assume 90% lipid on average. So
about 400 or so grams are actual stored TG. When burned by the body, one gram of fat
provides 9 calories so 400 grams of fat contains about 3600 calories of stored energy. Now
you know where the old axiom of ~3,500 calories to lose a pound of fat comes from.

What's it for?

Other than being considered unattractive in modern society, you may be wondering what
role fat cells play in the body. The main role is as an energy storage dump. In fact, up until
about 1994, the predominant view of fat cells was that this is all they were: a passive place
for the body to store energy for times when there wasn't enough food available. This turns
out to be drastically incorrect but, before we go on, let's look at that one aspect of fat cells.

Fat cells are truly exceptional in their capacity to store energy. As mentioned above, a
single pound of fat contains roughly 3,500 calories of stored energy. Assuming you could
burn 100% fat as fuel (you can't for reasons that aren't important now), this is enough
energy for a 150-pound person to walk roughly 35 miles or so before using that energy.
That's ONE pound of fat. Even at an extremely low 5 Ibs of body fat, which is near the
very low-end of how much a human might carry, you're looking at ~15,000 calories of
stored energy. That's 150 miles of straight walking or so.

Here are some more numbers to give you a little better perspective. The average American
male who may weigh 160 Ibs with 15% body fat has 24 pounds of body fat which is about
84,000 calories or so of stored energy. He'll have a metabolic rate close to 2,400
calories/day. The amount of energy stored in his fat would get him through nearly 35 days
without any food, assuming he was using 100% fat.

Extremely obese individuals may have upwards of 50-100 lbs of stored fat to the tune of
175,000-350,000 calories of stored energy. That'll keep them alive for several months at
least without emptying their fat stores. Some very obese individuals have been fasted for
up to a year without problems.

[p.14] In contrast, your other major energy source, which is stored carbohydrate in your muscles
and liver, only amounts to about 500 grams at the maximum. Each of those grams of carbs
gives your body 4 calories so that's 2000 calories or so as stored glycogen. Not even
enough to meet even a single's day’s caloric requirements.

So at the low end, fat has a good 7-times as much energy as all of the carbohydrate in your
body. At the high end, it can be several hundred times more. Although you don't really
want to use body protein for energy, assuming you used it all, it'd still only provide about
10,000 calories, still far fewer than your body fat. And you'd die long before you could use
it all up anyhow.

The reason for the difference in energy storage capacity is water. Carbohydrate (stored in
your muscles and liver as glycogen) is accompanied by a good bit of water. For every gram
of glycogen stored, you store anywhere from 3-4 grams of water with it. In contrast,
triglycerides only require about 1 gram of water for every gram of fat stored.

To store even 10,000 calories of energy as carbohydrate (2,500 grams of carbohydrate)
would require 7,500-10,000 grams of water. Your cells would explode. Since it doesn't have
a lot of water associated with it, fat is a very space efficient way to store energy. Relatively
speaking anyhow.

On top of that, a gram of fat provides more useable energy than either a gram of
carbohydrate or protein. As above, the commonly given values are 9 calories/gram for fat
and only 4 calories/gram for carbohydrates and proteins. So on top of being able to store
more grams of fat total, each of those grams provides more useable energy to the body.
Body fat is truly an ideal storage form of energy.

From an evolutionary standpoint, the exceptional energy storage capacity of fat cells
provided an excellent advantage to humans. Being able to store an effectively unlimited
amount of energy in a relatively limited amount of space made it easier to survive through
the time periods when food wasn't available. Now it's just another evolutionary leftover
that makes it a bitch to get into shape.

Speaking of evolutionary explanations, you might be wondering why men and women
show such different fat patterning and I don’t mean why as in ‘What causes it to occur’
(which I’ll discuss in a later chapter). Rather, what’s the reason for it in terms of ‘Why did
men and women evolve this way.’

To be honest, I don’t recall any good explanation for men’s propensity to store fat
viscerally and around the abdomen. Perhaps more visceral fat was helpful in mobilizing
fuel quickly when men were hunting; maybe they needed more ab fat to protect their
organs when they were beating the shit out of each other to try and get a cavewoman’s
attention. One researcher thinks that male abdominal fat patterning has no actual role,
and is simply an effect of gaining fat generally.

Women are actually easier to explain in this context. Women typically store fat in both
the hip/thigh area as well as the breasts; this turns out to make a lot of logical sense from
an evolutionary standpoint.

[p.15] Hip and thigh fat, as it turns out, exists to provide energy for breast-feeding after
pregnancy. Interestingly, when women are lactating, the normally impossibly stubborn
hip/thigh fat becomes the easiest to mobilize. I’ve wondered for a while if this couldn’t be
mimicked somehow (e.g. with drugs) but could never come up with any practical way of
doing it.

In addition, women’s fat patterning probably also evolved for sexual selection reasons.
Studies have clearly shown that men have a preference for an ideal waist/hip ratio (which
suggests fertility and health) in women. A woman with a narrow waist and curvy
hips/thighs is more likely to have this optimal waist/hip ratio than a female who carries
more visceral/abdominal fat.

Quite in fact, many of the situations that cause females to accumulate visceral fat (such as
polycystic ovary syndrome or PCOS) are associated with decreased fertility. This indicates
how strong of a signal the waist/hip ratio (reinforced by fat on the hips/thighs) is from an
evolutionary standpoint.

Why women have fatty breasts (something not seen in any other mammal) is an area of
much debate. It’s been suggested that they are meant to act as a ‘buttocks on the front of
the body’ due to the fact that humans mate face to face (well, sometimes). It’s also been
suggested that full breasts may act to ‘trick’ men so that they can’t tell when the woman is
fertile or not. Entire books have addressed this issue but I’ll sum up why women have
breasts, at least from a sexual selection standpoint, by pointing out the rather simple fact
that ‘Men like boobies.’

In any case, I have one final comment before moving on: I can’t explain why women put
fat on the backs of their arms. I’ve thought about it for years and simply can’t begin to
come up with a reason women put fat there. If you know, or think you know, please email
me. :

But wait, there's more

There's an old (and incorrect) idea that adult humans don't make new fat cells. That is,
and I'll discuss this more in a bit, you get born with a certain number of fat cells and you
may develop more at puberty or during pregnancy but that's it; your body doesn't make
new fat cells. Everything in that sentence is true except the last statement; even non-
pregnant adults can make new fat cells.

Usually this happens when the fat cells you have reach a certain size; that is, they are as
full as they can physically be. When this occurs, the actual stretching of the fat cell
stimulates the release of factors, such as Angiotensin II, prostacylin and others, which ‘tell’
the body to make new fat cells from something called preadipocytes. Preadipocytes are
dormant cells, sort of soldiers who wait for the signals to get called into action. When the
tight growth factors are released, preadipocytes mature into normal adipocytes. Voila! New
fat cells.

[p.16] Those newly formed fat cells can now be filled with yet more fat and glucose. In fact, a new
class of diabetic drugs (called TZD drugs) appear to work by stimulating the production of
new fat cells, which gives the-blood glucose and fatty acids another place to go. Oh yeah, if
the new fat cells get too large, your body will keep making more.

I'd note that, in certain situations, the body doesn’t make more fat cells and this causes a
ton of health problems because, without anywhere to put the incoming calories, the body
starts storing fat in inappropriate places like the liver, pancreas and other tissues. I'd also
note that this is only an issue for the extremely obese as a general rule of thumb. There is
a weird medical condition (called partial lipodystrophy) where lean adult humans don’t
have enough fat cells and they can get some of these health problems too. I can say with
great certainty that you’re not one of these people.

Unfortunately, getting rid of fat cells is nearly (but not completely) impossible. Sure,
liposuction is always available but, beyond that, eliminating fat cells is very difficult and
only occurs under extremely severe conditions. I'll talk about fat cell apoptosis (death)
later on.

If there is a single reason for athletes not to get too fat in the first place, this is probably it:
if your fat cells get too big, your body will make new ones. And it's nearly impossible to get
tid of the new ones. Obviously, if you're already very fat, there's little you can do: you're
pretty much stuck with your fat cells short of liposuction or something along those lines.
But if you're a lean athlete looking to gain weight (and realizing that you must gain some
body fat to do it effectively), you should keep a lid on that fat gain. You don't want to
stimulate your body to make new fat cells.

Dismissing a myth: Fat cells aren't all bad

If you asked most people about body fat, they'd say it was bad, they want to get rid of it,
etc. Even researchers tend to promote this view, that body fat is a negative. The main
focus tends to be on the negative health consequences of excess body fat (i.e. obesity) and
there is certainly much truth to this. Excess adiposity is associated with a number of
health consequences, most of them bad. From insulin resistance to the maintenance of a
low-level chronic inflammation, getting and staying fat in the long-term is generally not
healthy.

But simply saying that ‘fat is bad’ is a simplistic and incorrect view. The existence of body
fat has important roles in human health and survival beyond just energy although that is
one of its primary roles. Basically, while too much body f fat is definitely a health risk, too
little can be just as problematic.

One of the roles of body fat is as a physical cushion for your internal organs. The physical
nature of body fat allows it to dissipate force more effectively than muscle. Athletes
involved in combative sports (football, etc.) may benefit from carrying a little extra body
fat, to protect their internal organs when someone rams into them. Of course, in modern
society, most people don't really have to worry about such things.

[p.17] Fat cells also act as insulation, keeping folks warm when it gets cold. Of course, most
modern people can put on more clothes or turn up the heat, something that our ancestors
couldn't do.

A less well-recognized aspect of fat cells is their critical role in immune and inflammatory
responses. Pre-adipocytes, which I] mentioned above, act like macrophages, cells that are
critical for a proper immune system response. Of course, this certainly doesn't provide an
excuse or reason for carrying excess body fat. But people who diet to extremely lean levels
frequently report getting sick more, feeling more inflammation. While this certainly can't
be completely attributed to the loss of body fat, that may be part of the puzzle. As I noted
above, the opposite also holds true: the obese mount a chronic low-level inflammatory
response that causes other health problems.

As the final important role of body fat for this section, I want to talk about the role of
body fat stores in glucose tolerance. For optimal health, the body needs to maintain blood
glucose between fairly narrow limits. Anyone familiar with diabetes (either Type I or Type
II) knows that a big part of the health consequences of those diseases has to do with the
chronic high blood glucose (hyperglycemia) that occurs. For reference, normal blood
glucose is 80-120 mg/dl or so. Type I diabetics can run blood glucose in the 300-400's or
higher, Type II diabetics in the high 180's or worse. Simply put, running chronically high
blood glucose causes a lot of damage to the body.

Body fat is one of the places, along with muscle and liver, that your body stores glucose.
Studies of rats, or humans who have no fat cells (the lipodystrophy I mentioned above)
show chronic high blood glucose, just like diabetics. This is because muscle tissue has a
limit to how much glucose it can store as glycogen. Diabetics can't get blood glucose into
the cells because they are insulin deficient (Type I) or insulin resistant (Type II); rats and
humans without any body fat don't have any fat to store the glucose in. So the
mechanisin is different but the end result is the same. It’s also crucial that the body be
able to buffer incoming dietary fat by acutely storing it in fat cells; without this capacity,
bad things happen.

Of course, having no fat cells is rare and generally causes death at a very early age. So, if
you're reading this book, you don't-have it. My point is simply that all of the functions of
body fat aren't inherently negative. Fat exists for a reason, even if most of us are carrying
more of it than we need or want.

But wait, there's even more

Hopefully you get the idea that your body fat is an amazingly efficient place to store
energy, in addition to having other roles mentioned above. Not only does it store
incredible amounts of energy as it is, it can increase its energy storage capacity if needed by
making new fat cells. It'd be great, and I could end this chapter, if that's all there was to it.
As usual, it's not and things are much more complicated.

Since the mid-90's (1994 to be specific), the image of the fat cell as nothing more than a

passive player in the body has gone the way of the dodo. On top of its major role in
energy storage, your fat cells do so much more in terms of modulating your overall

10

[p.18] metabolism. Body fat is turning out to be an endocrine organ in its own right. That simply
means that fat cells are releasing hormones and compounds that are acting on other tissues
in the body (such as brain, the liver, and skeletal muscle).

On top of its obvious role in disposing of dietary fat, fat cells have been shown to play
roles in overall glucose metabolism, blood pressure, appetite, fuel utilization, and hormone
production to name just a few. And with each week, it seems as if yet another role for the
humble fat cell in modulating human metabolism is found. I’m not going to get into
massive detail in this book (beyond what's applicable to the stubborn fat issue) but want
to make you aware of some of what’s going on in fat cells.

On top of storing and releasing triglycerides, your fat cells also produce hormones
themselves. A partial list of the compounds released from your fat cells would include
leptin, which is involved in appetite, hormone levels, fat burning and muscle loss, not to
mention dozens of other systems; Angiotensin II, which is involved in blood pressure
regulation and even controls blood flow to the fat cell itself; Tumor necrosis factor-alpha,
which has many varied functions including fat burning, immune functioning, and cell
death; IGF-1, which is an anabolic hormone; inflammatory cytokines like Interleukin-6,
which is involved in immune function among other things; various prostaglandins, nitric
oxide, acylation stimulating protein, resistin, adiponectin and 1 could probably list a half
dozen more if I wanted to.

Fat cells are also one of the major sites of hormone metabolism. Testosterone is converted
to estrogen (via the enzyme aromatase) in fat cells in both men and women. In fact, most
of the estrogen in males (and in post-menopausal women) comes from the conversion of
testosterone in fat cells. Carrying more body fat for males means not only more estrogen,
but also less testosterone (yet another reason for athletes to avoid getting too fat). Athletes
who use anabolic steroids (or even prohormones) without using an anti-aromatase will get
more conversion to estrogen if they are carrying more body fat. The metabolism of other
hormones such as DHEA and androstenedione also occurs in fat cells.

Cortisol is also metabolized in fat cells, via an enzyme 11-beta-steroid dehydrogenase (11-
beta-HSD) and there is some indication that differences in the activity of this enzyme may
be related to how the body handles/produces cortisol, and to obesity.

And that's just a2 quick look at some of the things that your fat cells are doing in your
body. With each week, researchers seem to turn up more. As a quick tangent, the
discovery that fat cells were more than a passive place to store energy revolutionized the
study of obesity. So instead of dozens of studies indicating why fiber is important for
weight loss, there are now hundreds/thousands of studies dealing with all of the myriad
hormones that are released from fat cells, and how they affect metabolism.

Although many of these factors can't be controlled at this point, their discovery has
opened up an entirely new area of possibilities for manipulating body composition and
body fat levels. At the very least, we know more about why our bodies are reacting a
certain way. Knowing the why gives us at least some possibility of being able to do
something about it.

11

[p.19] The main point for you to get from this chapter is that fat cells are far more than just a
passive storage site for excess energy. Yes, they are amazingly well adapted to their role in
energy storage but they do far more. Basically, this is just background for the next
chapter. So turn the page already.

12

[p.20] Types of Body Fat

know, I want to move to the next topic of discussion which is the different ‘types’

N= that you know more about fat cells (in general) than you ever wanted to
of body fat.

In the last chapter, I sort of made it sound like all fat cells are basically the same; nothing
could be further from the truth. One of the more interesting areas of fat cell research has
to do with the heterogeneity of fat cells and fat cell metabolism. Heterogeneity is just a
nerd way of saying that the fat cells aren’t all the same.

Fat cells differ in how they handle dietary fat, how they respond to insulin and other
hormones, which of the myriad hormones they release and in what amounts, what their
blood flow is like and, as it turns out how easy or stubborn they are to get rid of.

The human body has at least 4 different depots of stored fat, although I’ll actually
distinguish a fifth that isn’t really used in the research. Let’s look at each since this
provides the major background for the rest of this book.

The first type of fat: Essential body fat

Essential body fat refers to the fat found around your organs (where it serves an important
cushioning role), in your nervous system (nerves are surrounded by sheaths of fat), and
especially in your brain. On which note: low fat diets can impair neural development in
developing babies because of the high fat content found there. Without enough dietary
fat (specifically DHA, one of the fish oils), baby brains don’t develop well. As well,
deficiencies of certain type of fatty acids in the brain seem to be related to both depression
and psychosis. Whether this is a function of diet, or of bad development as a child is
unknown.

For the most part, we don’t really need to worry that much about essential fat. As the

name implies, essential body fat is exactly that: essential. You can’t lose it and, even if you
could, you wouldn’t want to because you’d be dead.

13

[p.21] In men, essential fat typically makes up about 3% of total weight or so. So a male with
10% body fat has about 1/3" of that as essential fat that can’t be removed. This means that
anytime you hear someone claiming a body fat percentage below 3%, you should be fairly
suspicious. Either they’re lying or, more likely, the methodology they used to measure
body fat was inaccurate (some methods of estimation will give athletes a negative body fat
percentage, for example). Physiologically, a body fat percentage of 1% is impossible, as it
would require getting rid of the essential fat.

In females, essential fat is higher, and usually estimated at 9-12% or so. That difference in
essential fat (3% vs. 9-12%) is a big part of the difference in total body fat levels in men
and women. That is, a man at 10% body fat is roughly equivalent to a female at 16-19%
body fat; they are both 7% above their essential body fat levels. Again, you'll hear of
women (mainly bodybuilders) reporting values below 9%, which has more to do with the
problems in the estimation equations than anything else.

I don’t have much else to say about essential body fat and won’t mention it again in this
book. Even if you're obsessive about getting rid of al/ of your body fat, you don’t want to
lose essential fat and probably couldn’t do it in the first place. It’s there for a reason,
enough said.

The second type of fat: Brown adipose tissue (BAT)

I mentioned BAT in the last chapter and want to discuss it briefly again here. In
comparison to normal white adipose tissue (WAT), BAT is very different. Whereas a
primary role of WAT is energy storage (and of course, the other roles I described in the last
chapter) the main role of BAT is energy utilization, primarily to provide heat.

As mentioned last chapter, WAT is primarily made up of stored triglyceride with a small
amount of enzymes and other stuff. What I didn’t mention last chapter is that WAT also
has very few mitochondria (the powerhouse of the cell). Mitochondria make energy by
burning free fatty acids.

In contrast, BAT has very little lipid but quite a lot of mitochondria, which is why it’s so
good at energy (and heat) production. On top of that, BAT appears geared to burn fat
almost exclusively. And when it does so, the energy produced is lost as heat; it’s not used
to fuel any other chemical reactions.

The discovery of BAT, and its functions, opened up an entirely new area of obesity
research, as researchers thought that BAT activation might help to burn off excess calories
and limit or help to cure obesity. It was also thought that defects in BAT activity might be
a contributing factor to obesity.

And while drug companies became briefly interested in drugs to activate BAT, they pretty
much failed completely (for reasons I’m not going to get into here). To my knowledge,
drug companies have essentially given up on them. Of course, supplement companies
continue to sell compounds aimed at activating BAT; but having products that actually
work has never been the goal of that industry.

14

[p.22] For the most part, worrying about BAT is a losing proposition since humans don’t have
very much (what little we do have is found between the shoulder blades and in a few
other places). New research suggests that (some) humans might have relatively more BAT
than originally thought but it’s unclear how relevant this is to fat loss or obesity. Babies
have lots of BAT but most of it is lost when folks reach adulthood. A certain type of tumor
increase BAT levels and, oddly enough, lumberjacks (who spend their lives in the cold)
have more BAT than usual. But, practically speaking BAT is basically a dead-end at this
point.

Of more relevance to this book, worrying about BAT simply isn’t important in terms of
getting rid of stubborn body fat and I’m discussing it mainly for completeness. With new
drugs or what have you, finding ways to turn WAT into BAT may become available. For
now it’s a dead end.

The third type of fat: Visceral fat

Of all the types of fat in the body, visceral fat is probably the one that has gotten the most
interest, especially in terms of its effects on health. But let’s back up a step and look at
what visceral fat actually is first. Visceral fat is found around your internal organs and can
be thought of as gut fat. But it’s not the fat that you can see on top of your stomach; it’s
actually underneath your abdominal muscles surrounding your organs.

People who carry a lot of visceral fat are referred to as having central obesity and their
tummy pooches out quite a bit from their body. You can go to any mall food court if you
want to see examples of this. While this typically happens in males, it can also happen in
females under certain conditions, mainly in extreme obesity and after menopause.
Women who suffer from PCOS also have problems with central obesity due to higher
testosterone levels. I'll talk about hormones and how they impact body fat (and stubborn
fat specifically) in a later chapter.

Although carrying excess fat generally increases health risks, a great deal of research
suggests that visceral fat is even worse in this regard. At the very least, carrying around a
lot of visceral fat is associated with insulin resistance (meaning that insulin can’t do its job
well) although it’s questionable whether high visceral fat causes insulin resistance or
insulin resistance causes visceral fat accumulation. Early theories argued the former,
current research suggests that the latter is true.

Visceral fat is different than subcutaneous fat (discussed next) in many ways, which is why
I’m discussing it separately. The biggest difference is that visceral fat is more metabolically
active than subcutaneous fat. Meaning that it responds more effectively to fat
mobilizing/burning stimuli than other types of body fat. It’s also less affected by insulin,
which tends to shut down fat burning; when insulin goes up, visceral fat doesn’t stop
releasing fatty acids like other fat cells. This is a problem because high blood fatty acids
and high insulin levels tends to be a bad thing from a health perspective.

Visceral fat also has better blood flow compared to other body fat, meaning it’s easier to get

the fat out of the fat cell. All of this adds up to a type of body fat that is mobilized more
easily than the others.

15

[p.23] Visceral fat also appears to undergo something called apoptosis (which just means cell
death) more readily than other types of fat. There is also some research showing that
visceral fat responds differently to diet and exercise than other types of fat. It appears that
aerobic exercise gets rid of visceral fat more effectively than just reducing calories, probably
because of the hormonal response involved: aerobics raise catecholamine levels while diets
often reduce them, and visceral fat is very responsive to catecholamines.

For the most part, by the time you need the information in this book, visceral fat should
be a non-issue. Some males at 15% body fat can still have some but anybody much leaner
than that, unless they’re using massive amounts of androgens, should have gotten rid of it
already.

The fourth type of fat: Subcutaneous fat

Subcutaneous (sub-q for short) just means ‘under the skin’ (‘sub’=under, ‘cutaneous’ =
skin) which is where this fat is found. This is the type of fat that most folks are focused on
getting rid of (health professionals worry more about the impact of visceral fat). For the
test of this book, I'll be focusing exclusively on subcutaneous body fat since that is all that
is relevant to the topic of stubborn body fat.

Of your total body fat (including all of the above ‘types’ of fat), sub-q fat is the most
prominent. Anywhere from 40% to 60% of your total body fat is found under the skin,
which is what allows you to estimate body fat percentage with methods such as skinfolds.

As you're probably well aware, people differ quite a bit in how their fat is distributed, I
mentioned this briefly in Chapter 1 but want to get into more detail here. Typically, on
top of their greater amounts of visceral fat, males carry more of their fat on their
midsection and upper back, with much less on their hips and glutes. It’s not uncommon
to find men who have an extreme amount of body fat on their abdominal area while still
having very lean legs. This is sometimes called an android body fat deposition pattern. It’s
also described as having an apple shape. This turns out to be associated with many of the
health risks I briefly talked about above, mainly due to the increased visceral fat.

Women, in contrast, typically carry more fat on their hips and thighs with less on their
abs. Breast size can vary quite a bit but is another place where women store body fat. It’s
not uncommon for women to be extremely lean in their upper bodies (frequently having
visible abdominals) while having fairly fat hips and thighs. This is frequently called a
gynoid body fat pattern. It’s also described as having a pear shape. Women are protected
against many diseases that men get (such as heart attacks) because they store less fat
viscerally and more fat subcutaneously.

There are, of course exceptions. Little boys and girls display similar body fat patterns before
puberty suggesting that the causes of male and female fat patterning is due to the changes
in hormones that occur during puberty. I’ll discuss this in a later chapter.

Women who go through menopause without going on hormone replacement therapy can
switch to a more male-like body fat pattern (including gaining visceral fat). As well, many

16

[p.24] men will display more gynoid body fat patterning and women can display more android
body fat patterning (e.g. carrying more of their fat centrally around their stomach). When
I talk about hormones later, you'll see why a lot of this occurs.

Now, it turns out that even sub-q fat isn’t all the same. Hip and thigh fat is metabolically
different than abdominal fat, and there may be differences between different ‘parts’ of
abdominal fat. Recent research has identified three different areas of abdominal fat. Deep
abdominal fat is a lot like visceral fat and is relatively easy to get rid of. Superficial
abdominal fat can be further subdivided into upper and lower pieces with the upper fat
being easier to mobilize than the lower bit. Now you know why you get your upper 4
pack before the lower two abs ever come in.

Of course, hip and thigh fat is the hardest of all to get rid of for reasons I’ll discuss next and
in subsequent chapters. Women have the worst problems, as do men with female fat
patterns.

A little bit tangentially, I should at least mention breast fat and what (can) happen during
the course of dieting to extremely low body fat levels. As expected, breast fat is yet
another area that the body can draw energy from. Many female dieters find that their
breasts basically collapse during the course of an extended diet, especially when they reach
very low levels of body fat.

Worse yet, when they regain body fat, the breasts often don’t go back to normal
(although the hips and thighs certainly do). Some research has suggested that breast cells
can undergo apoptosis (cell death), similar to visceral fat, and this probably explains the
collapse followed by the lack of regain in the breast area.

However, this isn’t universal by any stretch, some women’s breasts don’t change at all.
Empirically, it seems that women who have had a child are more likely to have their
breasts collapse. There is probably also a hormonal effect. Females with more male like
body fat patterning or those who carry their fat more evenly, seem less likely to have their
breasts shrink during a diet.

The fifth type of fat: Stubborn fat

Now, although most researchers would be apoplectic (what a great word) at what I’m going
to say next, I’m going to differentiate subcutaneous body fat into two different types:
regular fat and stubborn fat. You can probably guess what those mean. Regular fat is the
stuff that comes off fairly easily. Just adjust diet and exercise a bit and it comes off without
too much trouble. Just about any non-retarded diet and exercise program will work fine
for that stuff. ‘

Stubborn fat is the other kind, the fat that just doesn’t seem to want to come off without a
nearly superhuman effort. Even then it doesn’t always come off. There are a number of
physiological reasons why this is the case. You'll learn about them very shortly. The
severe muscle loss that frequently occurs in extreme dieters usually occurs when they are
trying to chase down the last of the stubborn fat.

17

[p.25] As I mentioned in Chapter 1, when your body can’t get fat to burn, but needs energy
because you're cutting calories, it starts going after muscle at a quicker rate. This is one of
several reasons that muscle loss accelerates when people get super lean; for more details see
my Ultimate Diet 2.0 which talks about the other reasons behind this.

Of course, most of this book is aimed at stubborn fat. In men, who generally don’t store
much fat in their lower bodies, ab and low back fat is usually the most stubborn stuff,
although not for the reason you probably think. Men's lower body fat is actually just as
stubborn as women’s (when researchers biopsy it, men and women’s lower body fat is
physiologically identical). Since men don’t generally store fat there, however, it’s a non-
issue. So ab/low back fat becomes stubborn by default. I’d note that, for the most part,
losing ab/low back fat is far less an issue of major diet and training manipulations and more
an issue of patience (which most men lack). No matter how you cut it, men’s ab fat is
simply not as hard to get rid of as lower body fat. EVER.

Women, of course, tend to have the worst problems with getting rid of the last of their
body fat, as I’ve mentioned already. The upper body will often be completely shredded
while the legs remain smooth. You'll see why as you continue reading.

This isn’t to say that the methods in this book can’t help male dieters. I’m simply trying
to point out that they often aren’t necessary. Many men can and do get plenty lean (at
least to the level of 6-pack abdominals) with nothing but the standard diet and exercise
advice. But this frequently fails for females.

When I discuss some gender differences, you'll see why this is actually a huge problem; the
same strategies that work fine for men’s ‘stubborn’ ab fat often doesn’t cut it for women’s
lower body fat. A lot of male coaches forget this and assume that what works for them will
work for their female clients. But it simply doesn’t get the job done.

Summing up

So that’s an overview of different types of body fat with a bit of detail on how they do or
don’t respond to various stimuli; you’ll get many more details in upcoming chapters.

In general, fat will come off the body from least to most stubborn and there is a clear
hierarchy in how fat comes off the human body.

With few exceptions, usually involving heavy androgen use, visceral fat will come off fairly
quickly and easily. Women don’t generally carry much visceral fat so this tends to be a
non-issue for them. Men usually do carry some visceral fat and the fact that it comes off so
quickly is one reason that men always lose fat faster on a diet/exercise program than
women: the visceral fat is so easy to get rid of and there’s usually plenty of it. I’d note
that losing visceral fat often makes people ‘feel’ leaner even though they don’t look it.
This is hard to describe if you haven’t experienced it. You feel leaner, you can suck your
stomach in and it may be flatter. But visually your abs are just as jiggly as ever. That’s due
to visceral fat loss.

18

[p.26] After visceral fat comes off, the next place to lean out is the non-stubborn subcutaneous
fat. Delts, upper back, arms, etc. these areas always lean out far before the others. Few
have problems with these areas specifically, which is why I didn’t mention them.

When folks start getting leaner, the body starts dealing with abdominal fat. The deep
abdominal fat, similar to visceral fat, comes off first before the body attacks the superficial
abdominal fat. Even there, the upper portion comes off before the lower portion. For
most men, this would occur before the love handles or low back lean out but there is a
great deal of inconsistency here.

With few exceptions, the last to come off (if it comes off at all) is hip and thigh fat. As I
noted above, since men don’t typically carry a lot of hip and thigh fat, ab fat (superficial
ab fat) is their stubborn fat.

For women, unless they have atypical fat patterns, hip and thigh fat is always the last to
come off. For men with female fat patterns, the same comments apply: if it comes off at all,
it’ll be after every other part of the body looks like a living anatomy chart.

You may be wondering what makes stubborn fat so stubborn and it’s really the key
question of this book; figure out why stubborn fat is stubborn and we can start addressing
how to get rid of it.

But, before I can address that issue, I need to give a little more background information on

fat cells and how fat is stored and burned. Don’t worry; reading through my endless
exposition is always worth it in the long run.

19

[p.27] Basic Fat Cell Metabolism

of fat, I want to briefly discuss fat cell metabolism and what can occur in those fat

Ne that you know what body fat is and a little bit more about the different ‘types’
cells.

Strictly speaking, there are four distinct metabolic events that can occur in fat cells. They
are: fat cell hyperplasia, apoptosis, lipogenesis and lipolysis. Don’t freak out at the nerd-
speak, I’ll explain the processes one by one.

Hyperplasia: Fat cell hyperplasia refers to an increase in fat cell number (normally, fat
cells increase by growing in size via hypertrophy); this is also called adipogenesis. I’ve
mentioned fat cells hyperplasia in other chapters and pointed out that this is generally
only relevant for people who are extremely fat and continuing to gain fat. This certainly
isn’t relevant to readers of this book and I won’t discuss it further.

Apoptosis: Apoptosis is a term referring to the death and removal of cells. With a few
exceptions (notably visceral fat along with breast fat under certain conditions), fat cells
don’t generally undergo apoptosis except under very extreme conditions. Since it generally
won’t occur during the course of a normal diet, I won’t discuss apoptosis further.

For the majority of our purposes, only lipogenesis (fat storage) and lipolysis (fat
mobilization) are important and this chapter will focus on both. Towards that goal, let
me further explain lipogenesis and lipolysis.

Lipogenesis: Lipogenesis (‘lipo’ = fat, ‘genesis’ = making) simply means the formation of
new fat in fat cells from glycerol and three free fatty acids. Theoretically, the body can
convert carbohydrates to triglyceride (a process called de novo lipogenesis) but most
studies indicate that this contributes only minimally to total fat storage under most
normal dietary conditions. Usually it only occurs with long-term massive carbohydrate
overfeeding or high calorie glucose infusion or things like that; there is also some evidence
that it can occur to a relatively greater degree when individuals are hyperinsulinemic but,
again, this generally only occurs under conditions of obesity and isn’t relevant to this
book.

21

[p.28] Lipolysis: Lipolysis (‘lipo’ = fat, ‘lysis’ = breakdown) refers to the breakdown of the fat in
fat cells, producing glycerol and free fatty acids. Lipolysis is the single most important issue
to the topic of this book and I’ll discuss it in much greater detail in the next chapter.

I should note that fat storage and breakdown are typically going on at the same time, in
what’s termed a futile cycle. That is, the body is both storing fat and breaking it down
simultaneously; the combination of fat breakdown and resynthesis is referred to generally
as turnover (the same process occurs for protein as I detailed in my Protein Book).
While this seems wasteful, it allows the body to tailor its biological response to rapidly
changing needs.

As it turns out, there are site-specific differences in the rate of turnover. As I talked about a
chapter or two ago, visceral fat tends to be more metabolically active; it has a higher rate of
turnover than sub-q fat. There are also differences between different subcutaneous depots
that are gender specific. I touched on this last chapter and will discuss it in more detail
later.

In any case, what ultimately happens to fat mass depends on the balance between the two
processes. If the body is storing more fat than it’s releasing, you will be gaining body fat in
the long-term. If the body is releasing more fat than it’s storing, you will be losing fat over
time.

Of some interest, and I’ll come back to this in a later chapter, recent research suggests that
the body can release fat from one fat cell and have it be stored in a different fat cell. Even
more strangely, that same study found that women’s bodies may actually release small
amounts of fat from their upper bodies to be subsequently stored in their lower bodies.
This may explain a previous claim (that I had always dismissed) whereby women seem to
get leaner in the upper body while their lower bodies actually get fatter. I'll come back to
this later. -

What is fat redux

In a previous chapter, I explained that body fat is actually made up of stored triglyceride
(TG). I want to mention that the majority of dietary fat that you eat is also in the form of
TG’s. Chemically, TG’s are made up of a glycerol (a sugar) backbone attached to three fatty
acid chains.

The chemical structure of the fatty acid chain is actually what people are referring to when
they talk about saturated, unsaturated, or polyunsaturated fats. More accurately, they are
referring to the structure of the specific fatty acid chain (nieaning that any given TG can
actually contain some mixture of saturated, unsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acid
chains). I don’t want to get into the details beyond that, just keep in mind that a TG is a
molecule of glycerol bound to three fatty acid chains. There are also di-glycetides(DGs, I’ll
tell you about one in a second) and monoglycerides (MG) which are a molecule of glycerol
bound to two and one fatty acid chain(s) respectively.

So you already know that your fat cells are mostly stored TG. The other source of TG is
dietary fat and I want to talk briefly about what happens when you eat fat.

22

[p.29] Dietary fat metabolism in a nutshell

After consumption, dietary fat is broken down, repackaged into something called a
chylomicron, absorbed into the lymphatic system, and appears in the bloodstream about 3
hours after you eat. While a certain percentage of ingested dietary fat will be used for
energy or go to the liver or skeletal muscle for either storage or burning, some proportion
will always make it to the fat cells where it can potentially be stored. This is unavoidable.

Of some interest, research has shown clear gender differences in how ingested dietary fat is
handled. In men, a greater proportion of ingested fat tends to either be used for energy
immediately, absorbed by visceral fat, or simply sits in the bloodstream. The benefit of
this is that men can more easily burn off ingested dietary fat since less tends to get stored
in the sub-q fat. The drawback is that having lots of fatty acids sitting in the bloodstream
is one reason that men are more prone to heart disease and heart attacks.

In contrast, women tend to store more ingested dietary fat in subcutaneous fat; while this
protects women from heart attacks it also means more ingested fat gets stored that
eventually has to be mobilized and burned off. It actually gets worse than that; research
has found that, when women eat, their bodies preferentially increase blood flow to the
lower body, storing calories preferentially in the hips and thighs. Remember how your
mom said that eating cake went straight to the thighs. She was right.

I would comment that this preferential fat storage appears to be more pronounced when
women are over-eating, whether it occurs significantly with calories at maintenance or
while dieting is debatable. The benefit of this extra fat storage in sub-q depots is that
women are protected from heart attacks (at least before menopause). The negative is that
now you have to get it out of the fat cells to get lean.

I’d note that a couple of odd fats, notably medium chain triglycerides (MCT’s) and
diglycerides (DGs, two fatty acid chains attached to glycerol, available commercially as
Enova oil) are handled differently by the body compared to normal dietary fat.

Rather than going into the lymphatic system for storage, MCT’s and DG’s go through the
liver and there is evidence that the body uses them for energy preferentially over storing
them in fat cells. MCT’s have a slight thermic effect (15 grams per day can raise metabolic
rate by about 5% and consuming DG on a diet has been shown to increase fat loss slightly
(the impact is not massive, possibly a few tenths of a pound of fat per week). They may
have utility when folks are trying to get rid of stubborn body fat.

Fat storage

While fat storage and mobilization is unbelievably complex, I’m going to skip a lot of the
tiny details and focus on the bigger picture here. The tiny sub-pathways that are out of
our control and only of importance to researchers nerdier than me simply aren’t relevant
or interesting.

23

[p.30] In a general sense, fat storage is a process whereby the fat cells takes three fatty acids anda
molecule of glycerol and puts them together, storing them as TG in a lipid droplet. Since
it’s less important to this discussion, let me get glycerol out of the way first.

Now, when stored TG is mobilized, it produces glycerol and three fatty acids which move
into the bloodstream. For complex reasons, the fat cell can not reuse the glycerol,
although it will happily re-absorb the fatty acids. Glycerol is used elsewhere in the body
and can be converted back to glucose in the liver. Fat cells can only absorb glucose from
the bloodstream, which is then converted to glycerol within the fat cell before being
attached to three fatty acid chains.

So where does the glucose come from? Well, on a carb-based diet, it comes from ingested
dietary carbohydrates. Under low-carbohydrate conditions, the body will convert other
fuels to glucose. I already mentioned glycerol which is converted to glucose in the liver.
Pyruvate, lactate and some amino acids (leucine, alanine) are also converted to glucose.
These all provide glucose for the fat cell to absorb, convert to glycerol and bind to fatty
acids. That’s really all ] have to say about glycerol.

Now, the fatty acids being stored will generally be coming from the diet, from the
breakdown of ingested TG. As I mentioned above, recent research has also identified a
new pathway whereby fatty acids released from one fat cell can be restored in another fat
cell. My point being that even on a zero-fat diet, there are always plenty of fatty acids
floating around in the bloodstream for storage.

So how do the fatty acids (either from dietary TG or from other fat cells) get stored in the
fat cell? As with all processes in the body, this process is driven by enzymes. Although
there are lots of other pathways that play a role, the two enzymes of major importance for
this discussion are lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and acylation stimulating protein (ASP). Pretty
much everyone in the field focuses on the first, few seem to even be aware of the second.
In doing this, they miss much of the big picture.

Lipoprotein lipase

Lipoprotein lipase, or LPL, is one of the primary enzymes involved in fat storage. For
many years, in fact, it was thought to be the most important enzyme or possibly the only
one that mattered. Of course, as these things go, it turns out to be not quite that simple.
Another protein called acylation stimulating protein (ASP), discussed next, turns out to be
as, if not more, important than LPL.

LPL is produced within the fat cell, moves through the cell membrane, and attaches itself
to the outside of the fat cell. The only molecule that LPL seems to bind to are
chylomicrons which, as you'll recall, are a way that the body packages triglycerides.

When LPL interacts with a chylomicron, it breaks down the triglycerides in the
chylomicron, releasing free fatty acids (FFA) into the microcirculation around the fat cell.
Some of those FFA move into the fat cell while others are carried away via the bloodstream
so they can be used for fuel elsewhere. The FFA which move into the fat cell are combined
with glycerol to produce triglycerides, as I discussed above.

24

[p.31] One of the primary regulators of LPL is insulin which affects both the amount and activity
of LPL. Insulin is released when you eat, primarily in response to carbohydrate and
protein ingestion; in contrast, consuming dietary fat by itself does not raise insulin (as
you'll see, it still affects fat cell metabolism). The effect of insulin on LPL activity is a lot of
where the idea that only insulin stores fat comes from (this is the source of a lot of dietary
silliness as well). Unfortunately, that’s simplistic and incorrect, as you'll soon see.

LPL is also found on the cell membrane of muscle tissue and cardiac tissue, where it plays a
slightly different role. In both, LPL produces free fatty acids to be burned for energy within
the muscle or heart cell. The point being that you shouldn’t think of LPL as a ‘bad’
enzyme per se. Whether LPL has good or bad effects, in terms of fat storage, depends on
where it’s doing its job.

Overactivity of LPL on the fat cell isn’t a good thing by any means as it means that fat
cells are being exposed to higher levels of FFA for potential storage. In contrast, when LPL
activity in muscle or heart cells increases, those tissues can uptake more fatty acids for
either burning or storage.

In addition to the effect of insulin, LPL activity is also increased by the presence of
chylomicrons in the bloodstream which occurs after a meal. Its activity is decreased when
chylomicron levels decrease (such as during the period between meals). However, there
are other factors that affect the overall amount of LPL in the cell. These include both
hormones and habitual diet; there is assuredly a genetic factor.

However, of some interest, research has found that animals bred without LPL can still store
fat just fine. That single data point, ignored or unknown by most in the industry is a huge
indicator that there is more to fat storage than just LPL. Since people will incorrectly go
from ‘LPL stores fat’and ‘Insulin activates LPL’ to ‘Insulin stores fat’, it’s important to talk
about the other factors involved in fat storage. The most important in this case is
acylation-stimulating protein or ASP.

Acylation-stimulating protein (ASP)

For many years, it was thought that LPL was the key enzyme involved in fat storage. In
fact, if you look in most current physiology books, it is still the only enzyme that gets
much discussion. As tends to happen, this is utterly simplistic and completely incorrect.
This brings us to the discussion of acylation stimulating protein or ASP for short.

Discovered back in the 80’s (and yet ignored by most), ASP appears to be even more
critical for fat storage than LPL. One researcher has stated that ASP is the single most
potent stimulator of triglyceride synthesis in the fat cell. This is important.

Of importance, it’s been shown that rats who are bred without LPL but who have ASP can
still store fat in their fat cells. But this doesn’t work the other way around; rats without
ASP but which have LPL can’t store fat.

That tells us that ASP is the critical substance, not LPL, at least in rats (the data on ASP in
humans is less well developed). And while strategies to block ASP are being researched,

25

[p.32] not all is good; if the body can’t store nutrients in fat cells, they can accumulate in the
bloodstream causing health problems. My point being that LPL doesn’t appear to be
required for fat storage, but ASP most definitely is. So what is ASP and what does it do?

ASP is also made within the fat cell out of three different proteins, the names of which
aren’t important here. When ASP is activated, it promotes the synthesis of TG’s from FFA
and glycerol. LPL is only important to break FFA out of the chylomicron, ASP is the key
factor for actual TG synthesis.

So what activates ASP? Well, insulin can activate it for sure. However, the mere presence
of chlyomicrons in the bloodstream also activates ASP, even without any increase in
insulin. Studies have clearly shown that eating or infusing fat, even in the complete
absence of an increase in insulin will affect fat storage (increasing it) and breakdown
(inhibiting it). Insulin isn’t required for any of this to occur.

Even there, ASP itself does other things such as stimulating the pancreas to raise insulin
levels. Any time you eat dietary fat, there is potential for it to be stored, insulin or no
insulin. Avoiding eating carbohydrates with fat or whatever other silliness that is so often
proposed won’t change this. You could mainline dietary fat by itself and still store fat.
The body isn’t stupid and wouldn’t let you magically avoid fat gain if you only ate dietary
fat without ever raising insulin. Eat fat and the chylomicron will activate ASP; along with
storing fat, ASP will increase insulin levels itself.

Of course, if you’re on a diet and in a caloric deficit, this doesn’t matter massively as the
overall effect (fat storage minus release) should still have a net result in decreasing body fat
mass. That is, even if you store some fat after a meal (insulin or not), as long as you’re
losing more over the course of a day (because you're in a caloric deficit), you still get
leaner.

With one weird exception that has only recently been brought to light. Female dieters
have occasionally claimed to be gaining fat in their legs while leaning out in their upper
bodies. I used to dismiss this as some weird: perception thing but there may be truth to it.
As I noted above, research has identified a new pathway by which fatty acids mobilized
from one place (e.g. the upper body) can be stored in others (e.g. the legs). This could
potentially occur even in a caloric deficit, fatty acids are getting pulled out of the upper
body and restored as fat in the lower body.

In any case, having looked at the processes of fat storage, I want to move onto a more
interesting topic which is how fat is burned off the body. That’s the topic of the next
chapter.

26

[p.33] Burning Body Fat

fat is ‘burned’ or ‘lost’, both in generai and specifically in terms of the issue of
stubborn body fat. First I want to define what ‘burning’ body fat even means,
before looking at the three Key steps involved in getting rid of body fat.

He: looked at fat storage in the previous chapter, ] now want to move on to how

What exactly does it mean to burn body fat?

People usually talk about ‘burning’ body fat without ever really being clear on what it
means. In physiological terms, ‘burning’ is better described as oxidizing. This simply
means that the body reacts some fuel with oxygen, ultimately producing adenosine
triphosphate (ATP). ATP is the only fuel that cells can use directly and you can consider it
to be the basic energy currency of all cells in the body; other fuels are only valuable in
that they can be oxidized to produce ATP. Any time a cell burns fuel for energy, it
produces ATP, how much is actually produced depends on which fuel you're talking about
(don’t want to get into details beyond that).

What’s relevant here is what’s happening to the triglycerides (TGs) stored in your fat cells,
which is where the fatty acids which are ‘burned’ are coming from. Most tissues in the
body can use fatty acids for fuel but the main ones we are interested in are skeletal muscle
’ and the liver. A few tissues, such as the brain, can’t use fatty acids directly, however they
often can use ketones which are made from fatty acids (in the liver).

So let’s look at the mechanisms underlying the process of fat burning. Fundamentally,
there are three primary steps: breakdown, transport, and oxidation (burning). There are
some other steps that are often discussed in the literature, however they are not practically
relevant. The three below are the key ones of interest.

Step 1: Breakdown
The first step in burning off body fat is getting it out of your fat cells. You might even

argue that this is the most important step since, if you can’t get the fat out of the fat cell,
you can’t burn it off (various forms of liposuction being the only way around this).

27

[p.34] Recall that body fat is primarily stored triglyceride with a small amount of water and some
enzymatic and cellular machinery. Mobilizing body fat requires that we first break down
the stored triglyceride into three fatty acids and a molecule of glycerol. The single step
that limits how quickly or slowly fat is mobilized (scientists call this the ‘rate-limiting’
step) is the activity of an enzyme called hormone sensitive lipase or HSL.

What regulates HSL? A number of hormones such as testosterone, cortisol, estrogen, and
growth hormone have modulating effects on HSL (mainly increasing or decreasing the
total levels of HSL in the fat cell). However, for this chapter’s purposes, the only
hormones that we need to be concerned with in terms of affecting HSL activity are the
catecholamines and insulin.

The catecholamines are adrenaline and noradrenaline, which are also called epinephrine
and norepinephrine depending on where you live. In the US, people use
adrenaline/noradrenaline; in the rest of the free world, they call the hormones
epinephrine/norepinephrine. Dol really need to tell readers of this book what insulin is?

I really want to drive this point home that, in humans, only insulin and the
catecholamines are relevant in terms of acute fat mobilization. The other hormones have
either a modulating effect, at best, or no effect at all.

The primary inactivator of HSL is the hormone insulin, which blunts HSL activity at
even low concentrations. In fact, even fasting insulin levels are sufficient to inactivate
HSL by nearly 50%. Even small increases in insulin (from either protein or carbohydrate
intake) inactivate HSL almost completely. As it turns out, the mere presence of
triglycerides in the bloodstream (via infusion or by just eating fat by itself) also inhibits
HSL activity so you can’t just blame insulin. Any time you eat, HSL will be inhibited.

The primary hormones which activate HSL are the catecholamines: adrenaline and
noradrenaline. Adrenaline is released from the adrenal cortex, traveling through the
ploodstream to affect various tissues. This means that blood flow to fat cells has an impact
on how much or how little adrenaline will reach fat cells. Noradrenaline is released from
nerve terminals which interact directly with the cells. As you'll see in a subsequent
chapter, this is important because how someone exercises can drastically affect how
adrenaline and noradrenaline are released.

The key regulator of HSL is a compound called cyclical adenosine monophospahte (cAMP).
When cAMP levels are low, HSL activity is low and fat mobilization will also be low.
When cAMP levels are high, HSL activity is high and fat breakdown increases. For optimal
fat mobilization, therefore, we want high levels of cellular cAMP.

’d note that cAMP is all over the body and this has been a source of problems with
previous approaches to stubborn fat loss. Anything consumed orally (e.g. the supplement
forskolin) that affects cAMP is going to affect cAMP levels all over the body. This can have
a variety of effects, some good, and some bad. Ideally we want to try and isolate cAMP
changes to fat cells although, depending on what you're talking about (diet, activity, etc),
this is usually impossible. At best you try to ensure that raising cAMP in fat cells doesn’t
do something nasty elsewhere in the body, like jacking heart rate and blood pressure sky
high.

28

[p.35] Insulin lowers levels of cAMP, inhibiting fat mobilization. The catecholamines are little bit
more complex. Depending on the type of fat cell, and the levels of catecholamines, the
end result can be increased or decreased levels of cAMP. To understand that, I need to
explain adrenoceptors.

All about adrenoceptors

To understand some of the cryptic remarks above, I need to back up a bit and explain how
the catecholamines send their signals. So you know, all hormones work through specific
receptors and the catecholamines are no different, they have their own specific receptors
called adrenoreceptors or simply adrenoceptors. I'll use both interchangeably throughout
the book.

Now, there are two major classes of adrenoreceptors: beta and alpha which are found all
over the body. This includes the brain, liver, skeletal muscle, fat cells, heart, blood vessels,
etc.; you name it and there are probably adrenoreceptors there. Case in point, the penis
has adrenoceptors, so does female genitalia. One of the compounds I'll talk about later
(yohimbe or yohimbine), by affecting the adrenoceptors in the genitals increases blood
flow and sexual stimulation. It’s always fun when you get a boner in the gym after taking
oral yohimbe, but I digress.

There are at least 3 (and maybe 4) different beta-receptors called, imaginatively: beta-1,
beta-2, beta-3, and beta-4 (aka the atypical beta-3 adrenoceptor). Alpha-adrenoreceptors
come in at least two flavors, alpha-1 and alpha-2. Each has a whole bunch of subtypes
although this isn’t that important for this book. In animals, beta-3 receptors are found
mostly in BAT (discussed previously); I already told you that most humans don’t have
much BAT. Alpha-1 receptors do play a role in fat cell metabolism but it has more to do
with glucose than fat metabolism per se, so I won't address them here.

The main receptors we need to worry about in human fat cells are alpha-2 receptors and
beta-2 receptors (beta-1 may play a role in fat mobilization as well), both of which actively
bind the catecholamine hormones. When catecholamines bind to beta-2 receptors, they
increase cAMP levels, which increases fat breakdown. Great.

However, when the catecholamines bind alpha-2 receptors they decrease cAMP levels
which decreases fat breakdown. Not great. But it means that catecholamines, which I told
you were fat mobilizers, can actually send both fat mobilizing and anti-fat mobilizing
signals. Which signal is sent depends on several factors including the levels of each
hormone, as well as the relative proportion of adrenoceptors in a given tissue.

As it turns out, different areas (or depots) of fat have different levels of alpha and beta-
adrenoceptors and this controls, to a massive degree, whether any given exercise stimulus
has a net lipolytic or anti-lipolytic effect. I’ll come back to this in two chapters when I
finally answer the question of “What makes stubborn fat stubborn.” Various factors
control adrenoceptor number, I'll detail some of them later in this book.

For now, all you need to remember is that adrenoceptors ultimately determine whether
the catecholamines end up stimulating fat breakdown or not.

29

[p.36] Back to mobilization: Summing up

I should note that insulin pretty much always wins the battle over fat cell metabolism.
That is, even in the face of high catecholamine levels, if insulin is elevated, fat
mobilization will be impaired. As it turns out, high insulin levels in the face of high
catecholamine levels generally doesn’t happen under normal conditions.

Typically when insulin is high, the catecholamines are low and vice versa (e.g. during
exercise, insulin levels drop as catecholamine levels go up). There are exceptions of
course; if you drink a carb drink during aerobic exercise, for example, the slight increase in
insulin may decrease fat mobilization despite increased levels of catecholamines.

Tangentially, whether or not ingested carbohydrate impairs lipolysis or fat oxidation
depends on the intensity of the exercise. At low intensities, ingested carbohydrates clearly
impair fat oxidation, especially in untrained individuals. At higher intensities, in trained
individuals, carbohydrate ingestion does not negatively affect fat utilization during aerobic
exercise.

Ultimately, you just need to remember the following: insulin inhibits fat mobilization and
the catecholamines can either stimulate or inhibit lipolysis depending on a few variables
that I'll address in detail in a later chapter. With few exceptions (the main one being
severe insulin resistance of the fat cell, meaning that insulin can’t exert its normal effects),
insulin wins the battle.

Step 2: Blood flow and transport

Unfortunately, just mobilizing fatty acids out of the fat cell isn’t all that is required for fat
loss to occur. The next, and critically important step, is to get the fatty acids away from
the fat cell, to other tissues where they can actually be burned. In fact, if the fatty acids
aren’t moved out of the adipose tissue in this fashion, the body will happily re-store them
(a process called re-esterification). So after mobilization, the next key step is transport out
of the fat cell to other tissues. This process is dependent on blood flow through the
adipose tissue.

Adipose tissue blood flow (ATBF) is tough to measure and there’s a lot less research than I’d
like on the topic; but it’s become clear that ABTF is not only differentially regulated but
can be potentially manipulated. For example, I already mentioned that following a meal,
females appear to preferentially increase blood flow to the lower body, increasing nutrient
storage there. This appears to be especially the case when excess calories are being
consumed. -

Other factors such as hormones (discussed next chapter) can: also affect adipose tissue
blood flow. Aerobic exercise tends to increase adipose tissue blood flow with the effect
becoming greater as the duration increases. Temperature appears to play a role too, the
body closes off blood flow when it’s cold and increasing temperature increases blood flow;
perhaps the tummy and thigh wraps worn during exercise do more than just cause local
water loss. Interestingly, blood flow to fat cells increases with long-term fasting, probably
to help the body mobilize fatty acids for fuel.

30

[p.37] Adipose tissue blood flow is also profoundly controlled by adrenoreceptor levels with the
same basic scheme I discussed above about fat cell metabolism holding true. Beta-
adrenoceptor activity increases adipose tissue blood flow; alpha-adrenoreceptor activation
inhibits it. Which means that, conceivably, exercise will impact on adipose tissue blood
flow in the same way that it does on adipose tissue metabolism as a whole. That is,
depending on the relative concentration of each hormone, along with the ratio of alpha-
and beta-adrenoceptors, ATBF may be controlled by exercise, diet, etc. in the same way
that fat mobilization is.

Interestingly, insulin also affects blood flow but not in the way that you think. Insulin,
via stimulation of something called nitric oxide (NO, yes the same stuff that all of the new
supplements claim to affect) increases blood flow; this is part of why folks get vascular and
pumped when they consume carbs before training. So raising insulin should help with fat
loss, right? Wrong. Remember that insulin is profoundly anti-lipolytic, as discussed above.
As it turns out, many of the compounds that increase ATBF end up inhibiting lipolysis.

For example, nitric oxide is anti-lipolytic so don’t think you can trick the system by using
a NO supplement before aerobics. It might increase blood flow to adipose tissue (maybe)
but at the consequence of inhibiting fat breakdown.

In any case, let’s assume that everything has worked right and stored triglyceride has been
broken down into fatty acids and glycerol. Both enter the microcirculation around the fat
cells. As mentioned, glycerol can’t re-enter the fat cell so let’s forget about it.

Some of the released FFA bind to a protein in the blood called albumin. If blood flow is
particularly sluggish, fatty acids just get re-esterified into the fat cell, accomplishing
nothing. If blood flow is good or increased, the albumin bound FFA will get carried far far
away from the fat cell. Let’s assume this latter event has occurred and see what happens to
the fatty. acids bound to albumin now being carried through the bloodstream.

Step 3: Uptake and utilization

So now we have albumin bound FFA floating around in the bloodstream; this makes the
FFA generally available to other tissues in the body. Eventually, the albumin bound FFA
will come across a tissue (such as the liver or muscle) which can use it for fuel. The FFA
will be taken up into that tissue (there is a specific fatty acid binding protein which
transports the fatty acid into the cell) at this time for one of a couple of potential fates. In
both liver and muscle, the FFA can either be re-stored as triglyceride (which is unusual
under normal dieting conditions but occurs during overfeeding) or burned for energy. I'll
only focus on the latter.

To be used for energy, the FFA has to be transported into the mitochondria by an enzyme
called carnitine palmityl transferase (CPT). Incidentally, this is the theory behind carnitine
supplements, that by increasing levels of CPT, you get more fat burning. Looks great on
paper although it’s never really panned out (the reasons why are discussed in detail in my
Protein Book). CPT activity is controlled by a few different factors, including your

31

[p.38] aerobic capacity (the more aerobically fit you are, the more fat you burn), as well as muscle
glycogen levels.

Glycogen is a long carbohydrate chain stored in your muscles or liver. When glycogen is
high, CPT activity is low and fat oxidation is low, and vice versa. This is true for both
muscle and liver. By depleting muscle glycogen, dieters can increase CPT activity, allowing
them to better burn off the fatty acids that we mobilized from the fat cell.

I suspect that this is part of why certain types of training such as high rep short rest
periods work the way they do. While the usual explanation has to do with the post-
exercise energy expenditure, this turns out to be pretty small and fairly irrelevant.
However, by depleting full body glycogen stores, fat oxidation is ramped up ensuring that
mobilized fatty acids will get burned for energy (note: this is why I included a depletion
phase in the Ultimate Diet 2.0). On a caloric deficit this is clearly a nice thing.

Summary

When people refer to fat burning, or just to fat loss in general, what they mean is that
stored fat (triglyceride) is first broken down in the fat cell, released into the bloodstream,
and subsequently used to produce energy in another tissue such as the liver or muscle.

Fat breakdown is arguably the crucial step as you can’t lose fat if you can’t get it out of the
cell (liposuction excepted). While other hormones clearly play a role, the two most
important hormones controlling fat breakdown are insulin and the catecholamines. The
impact of insulin is distinctly negative, insulin inhibits fat breakdown at even low levels.

The catecholamines are trickier and can exert a lipolytic effect or anti-lipolytic effect
depending. The ratio of beta- and alpha-adrenoceptors as well as the levels of each
hormone, impacts on whether a net lipolytic or anti-lipolytic effect is seen at the fat cell.

Assuming that fat has been mobilized, it moves out of the fat cell into the
microcirculation. Ideally, all released fatty acids would be carried away, bound to a protein
called albumin. However, the fat cell will happily store the fatty acid back in the fat cell if
blood flow is poor. A number of factors control blood flow including hormones and, once
again, adrenoceptor levels.

Once bound to albumin and carried away from the fat cell, fat can be used for energy in
tissues such as the liver or muscle. Under certain conditions, the transported fatty acids
can be stored (e.g. as intramuscular triglyceride) although this is unlikely to occur in a
caloric deficit.

Now that you understand the basics of both fat storage and fat mobilization, I want to
delve further into what controls fat patterning, focusing primarily on hormone levels.

32

[p.39] Hormones and Body Fat

Having addressed the basics of how fat is both stored and burned, I next want to look at
how various hormones affect fat cell metabolism and storage.

For each hormone, I’m going to talk about not only global effects on fat storage or
mobilization, but also how those hormones might impact on such things as adrenoceptor
number, adipose tissue blood flow or fat oxidation (i.e. the three key processes I discussed
in Chapter 5).

Insulin

I’ve already discussed insulin in some detail in the previous chapters in terms of how it
affects fat cell metabolism. Of all the hormones involved, insulin is generally put rather
simplistically into the ‘bad’ category when it comes to fat loss and there is some truth to
that. As a general storage hormone, insulin is involved in fat storage and clearly inhibits
fat mobilization (by inhibiting HSL) as well.

However, insulin is one of the hormones that signals the brain about the body’s energy
status; quite in fact, injecting insulin into rat brains makes them lose their appetite and
lose weight. Unfortunately, the human body doesn’t seem to respond so nicely. One
study that gave inhalable insulin did show a decrease in food intake in humans. However,
chronically elevated insulin (as occurs with obesity) doesn’t seem to do much to turn off
appetite or cause weight loss. This is probably because the brain has become resistant to
the effects of insulin.

Insulin is primarily under control of the diet and can be-affected by either changing the
quality (type) or quantity (amount) of carbohydrates that you’re eating. Insulin levels will
be reduced if you pick lower Glycemic Index (GI) carbs or simply reduce the quantity of
carbohydrates that you're eating.

Interestingly this actually appears to have different effects on such things as insulin
resistance and fatty acid release; reducing the quantity of carbs eaten causes insulin
resistance (actually a good thing on a diet for reasons I discussed in the UD2) and increases
fatty acid release from fat cells. Changing only the quality of carbs eaten does not have

33

[p.40] the same effect, maintaining good insulin sensitivity and blunting fatty acid release. In
this context, lowering carbohydrate quantity is probably the more beneficial approach.

Glucagon

Since I’ve just talked about insulin, I should talk about its ‘sister’ hormone which is
glucagon. Released when blood sugar falls, glucagon’s primary responsibility is to stimulate
the liver to break down stored glycogen and release glucose. A lot of people talk about the
insulin:glucagon ratio and this is related to the carbohydrate content of the diet (protein
also plays a role in glucagon’s release).

Based on animal research, glucagon is often claimed to be lipolytic; but this only holds for
animals (mainly of the rat and mouse variety). In humans, glucagon has no effect on
lipolysis and I have nothing more to say about glucagon than this: I wish the people who
still go on about how glucagon is a fat mobilizer would read research past 1972 and stop
spouting out of date nonsense.

The catecholamines: Adrenaline and noradrenaline

Like insulin, I already discussed the catecholamines to some degree but I’ll recap here.
Adrenaline is released from the adrenal gland, noradrenaline from the nerve terminals.
Collectively they are often termed the fight or flight hormones since they tend to be
released under those conditions. As mentioned, adrenaline and noradrenaline are called
epinephrine and norepinephrine everywhere in the world except the US. We just rock
that way.

Adrenaline and noradrenaline are involved in mobilizing fuel for the body. In the liver,
they promote the breakdown of liver glycogen to glucose; in fat cells (as discussed last
chapter) they generally increase fatty acid mobilization to provide fuel to the body. Of
course, they have numerous other effects such as increasing heart rate and blood pressure,
making you empty your bladder if it’s full (but preventing urine production), blunting
appetite, and inhibiting digestion (this is why you cramp if you exercise too close to
eating).

Just about any stressor from physical to psychological will increase the release of adrenaline
and noradrenaline but exercise is, generally speaking, what we'll use to control these
hormones. As I'll detail in a subsequent chapter, the type and intensity of exercise that
you do affects how adrenaline/noradrenaline are released and this is a big key to targeting
stubborn fat. -

Diet can also impact levels of these hormones, lower carbohydrate diets often increase
catecholamine levels (to help with fuel mobilization) although eating carbohydrates can
raise levels too (by first raising insulin which stimulates nervous system output). Quite in
fact, the thermic effect of eating carbohydrates is directly related to the increase in insulin .
which drives adrenaline/noradrenaline release.

34

[p.41] Of course, supplements can raise levels of these hormones. Caffeine has a small effect
although this is mostly lost with chronic use. Ephedrine not only mimics
adrenaline/noradrenaline in the body, it increases the output of those hormones. The
amino acid L-tyrosine, which I'll mention again in Chapter 9, can also help to increase
catecholamine release in response to other stimuli (such as exercise, ephedrine, or
caffeine).

Growth hormone (GH)

GH is a hormone that has gotten altogether too much attention in the sports nutrition
world. Claimed as a muscular anabolic, GH does do amazing things in people who are
deficient and have their levels replaced. However, increasing GH in otherwise normal
individuals has far less of an impact. Injectable GH, at least by itself, does nothing to
increase muscle growth although it appears to synergize with other compounds/drugs.
However, raising GH with various supplements and training strategies does nothing for
muscle growth. In fact, many of the strategies aimed at increasing GH are probably
detrimental to muscle growth in that they require avoiding food or fluids for long periods.

When it comes to fat loss, GH does affect lipolysis; in fact, preventing the body from
releasing GH under conditions of starvation increases muscle loss because the body can’t
optimally mobilize fatty acids. Injectable GH is known for having profound effects in
dieting bodybuilders; but the levels seen with injection simply aren’t attainable in any
non-drug fashion.

In the big scheme of all things lipolytic, GH is of secondary importance and quite delayed
in its effects. While normal physiological pulses of GH increase lipolysis, the effect is small
and occurs several hours after the GH pulse occurs. Of some interest, the normal
nighttime GH pulse appears to be required for optimal lipolysis the next day.

GH is sensitive to diet of course, typically going up when carbohydrates are restricted to
help mobilize fuel. Exercise of just about any sort raises GH as well. While various
combinations of amino acids (usually arginine and ornithine) have been touted as GH
releasers, they generally taste like bleach and require massive, vomit inducing doses. Low
dose glutamine (2 grams) has been shown to increase GH levels and I recommended taking
some at bedtime and prior to training in the UD2. Whether it actually impacts on fat loss
is unknown. It may do nothing, although it certainly won’t be hurt anything.

Cortisol

Traditionally, athletes have put cortisol in the ‘bad’ category of hormones; in more recent
years, cortisol may have become the most maligned hormone of them all. Cortisol makes
you fat, cortisol makes you weak, cortisol is probably responsible for the situation in Iraq.
At the same time, individuals who don’t have enough cortisol (this occurs in certain
disease states) know that producing no cortisol is not a good thing. You have no energy,
joints hurt, injuries won’t heal; cortisol is required for life.

35

[p.42] The reason for this discrepancy is that cortisol is a very schizophrenic hormone and can
have either profoundly beneficial or profoundly negative effects. The basic situation is
that normal physiological cortisol pulses are beneficial, adaptive and a good thing to have.
Such pulses stimulate lipolysis (in fact, the morning cortisol pulse is required for optimal
lipolysis), improve memory, and improve adaptation. To my knowledge, cortisol does not
significantly impact on either adipose tissue blood flow or fat oxidation in other tissues.
But it is part of mobilizing fatty acids for fuel. Like GH, cortisol plays a distinctly
secondary role in stimulating lipolysis, having a minor effect that doesn’t appear for several
hours. Physiological pulses of cortisol are a very good thing.

However, chronically elevated cortisol, which can occur during conditions of sustained
stress (such as excessive training, dieting or a.combination of the two), is distinctly a bad
thing. It is heavily involved in depression, causes memory and verbal problems, impairs
immune function and has a host of other negative health effects. Chronically elevated
cortisol is a very bad thing.

In conjunction with elevated insulin levels (and I’d note that high cortisol causes insulin
resistance, which can lead to high insulin levels), cortisol is extremely lipogenic, especially
in visceral fat. Individuals with chronically elevated cortisol often gain fat around the
midsection. Cortisol (along with the hormone aldosterone) also causes water retention;
this can mask true fat loss. Additionally, cortisol also induces leptin resistance (leptin is
discussed below), preventing leptin from exerting its metabolic effects.

Cortisol shows a daily rhythm, ideally peaking in the morning and going down at night.
This can be thrown off by a number of things. Hardcore food restriction can cause the
normal pattern to shift forwards, you see lower levels in the morning and elevated levels in
the evening. Low-carb diets tend to initially increase cortisol (to help mobilize fuel)
although levels may come down after the body adapts to running on ketones.

One of cortisol’s primary effects is to mobilize glucose to sustain blood glucose levels, it
does this by increasing the production of glucose in the liver. This is on top of mobilizing
protein (often from muscle) to use to make that glucose. Logically, higher carbohydrate
diets tend to keep cortisol levels down although excessive training and/or general caloric
restriction offsets this.

As I mentioned in a previous chapter, one area of current interest has to do with the
metabolism of cortisol within fat cells themselves, via the enzyme 11-beta-hydroxysteroid-
deydrogenase (11-beta-HSD). There is evidence that this local cortisol metabolism may be
impacting (usually negatively) on fat cell metabolism and ways of modulating it may have
some use. I'll mention an intriguing one in Chapter 9.

I bring up the excessive training aspect because it is profoundly easy to overtrain when
dieting to extremely low body fat levels and most people try to train too hard too often
while they are dieting. People who ignore my warnings when I present the stubborn fat
protocols later in this book will end up doing themselves great harm when they drastically
overtrain on lowered calories.

When dieting to extremely low levels, it’s crucial to keep training volume under control to
avoid overtraining. Keeping carbohydrates higher (or refeeding/taking breaks) is also of

36

[p.43] value. Generally trying to keep away from stressful aspects of life is great advice but not
always practical.

In terms of supplements, Vitamin C (2 grams/day) may help with elevated cortisol levels,
phosphatidylserine (400-800 mg/day) has also shown some efficacy. There are a number of
herbs (theanine, bacopa and many others) that are often suggested to help with elevated
cortisol levels. They might be worth considering if someone is having problems and
nothing else was working; I can’t say I’ve seen much convincing data that they do much.

Thyroid

In the same way that cortisol has generally been categorized as ‘bad’ in the bodybuilding
subculture, thyroid hormones are generally thought of as ‘good’. As usual, this is a terrible
oversimplification.

There are two primary thyroid hormones which are T4 and T3 (I'll spare you the full
names); T2 also has some acute metabolic effects. The body releases both hormones in
roughly an 80:20 ratio of T4:T3 from the thyroid gland, most T3 production occurs in
other tissues via an enzyme called Type Il Deiodinase (which removes one of the iodine
molecules from T4 to produce T3), much of this occurs in the liver.

T3 has profound impacts on all aspects of metabolism and is one of several hormones
(along with the catecholamines, insulin and leptin) which regulate metabolic rate. I'd
point out that thyroid is not the only important hormone in terms of regulating metabolic
rate; if it were then keeping diets moving would be no more difficult than just taking some
form of thyroid (whether synthetic or natural). But this doesn’t work because other
hormones are relevant as well.

Which isn’t to say that thyroid doesn’t play a major role in regulating metabolic rate, just
that it’s not the only hormone involved. Metabolically, thyroid has both short-term and
long-term effects on metabolism. Acutely, the breakdown of T3 to T2 has uncoupling
effects in mitochondria. Long-term, T3 has effects on gene expression that not only take
time io fully exert themselves but may last for 3-4 weeks before disappearing after thyroid
levels drop.

Of extreme relevance to fat loss, thyroid hormones interact synergistically with the
catecholamines: catecholamines increase thyroid conversion and thyroid increases
catecholamine action. Bodybuilders have often stacked clenbuterol and thyroid
medication and this is a very potent combination.

Thyroid hormones affect a number of processes important to the issue of fat loss and
stubborn fat. Studies have shown that individuals with low thyroid have poorer adipose
tissue blood flow and that correcting this fixes the problems; hyperthyroid individuals
have high levels of adipose tissue blood flow.

As mentioned above, thyroid hormones also directly impact on how well the
catecholamines stimulate lipolysis; when thyroid is low, lipolysis is inhibited. Of course,

37

[p.44] by affecting overall metabolic rate, thyroid helps the body to burn off fatty acids by
increasing how rapidly all tissues use fuel.

Which isn’t to say that more thyroid hormone is better. Excessive thyroid levels have a
negative effect on muscle mass. Studies using high dose thyroid while dieting find greater
protein loss; studies using much more realistic physiological doses generally don’t.

Of some interest to the issue of stubborn body fat, it’s interesting to note that women are
far more likely to have sub-optimal thyroid levels than men and something like 9 out of 10
thyroid prescriptions are made for women. Given the impact of thyroid hormones in
modulating overall lipolysis and adipose tissue blood flow, along with its overall effects on
metabolism, the fact that women are starting with lower than optimal thyroid levels is yet
another reason that lower body fat is such a problem.

And that’s before even considering the drop in thyroid that occurs with long-term dieting
which I want to talk about next. In contrast to true hypothyroidism (which occurs due to ©
a defect in the thyroid gland), the drop in active thyroid hormone with dieting (referred
to as Euthyroid Sick Syndrome or ESS) is due to reduced conversion of T4 to T3 in the
liver.

A number of mechanisms mediate this including decreased T4 uptake into the liver along
with decreased activity of the deiodinase enzyme. High blood fatty acids are involved in
the inhibition of T4 uptake into the liver, while high levels of cortisol along with
decreased liver ATP levels are primarily responsible for the drop in deiodinase activity.

Both men and women have to contend with ESS on a diet but, clearly, women who are
starting out with sub-optimal levels of thyroid hormone in the first place are in an even
worse boat. A female who is starting out with low-normal thyroid levels to begin with will
have levels crash on an extended diet; not only does this slow overall fat loss but it makes
getting rid of stubborn lower body fat all that much more difficult.

Clearly if someone is starting out with low thyroid levels, there’s not much that can be
done short of obtaining either a synthetic thyroid compound (in the US, Cytomel is the
most common T3 drug) or natural compound (for example, some holistic physicians will
use a compound called Armour which is made from desiccated pig’s thyroid gland). This
may be worth pursuing as low thyroid levels cause other problems such as depression and
water retention; low thyroid levels also hurt protein synthesis. I know of at least one diet
guru who has had his female clients respond amazingly to small, replacement doses (12.5
mcg) of T3. This is enough to raise levels slightly without causing muscle loss or any of the
problems inherent to higher dose intakes.

If someone is not willing to go that route, there’s not much that can be done to correct a
true low-normal thyroid level. Getting sufficient iodine helps, excessive soy protein intake
can hurt (especially in conjunction with too little sodium) and that’s about it.

In regards to ESS per se, a number of strategies have been suggested. Guggulsterones may
increase either uptake or conversion of T4 in the liver and various phosphate salts were
suggested to do the same, but they don’t seem to have had much real world impact on fat
loss or anything else. Ephedrine increases T4 to T3 conversion as well.

38

[p.45] Frankly, taking proper diet breaks (periods of 10-14 days when calories are raised to
maintenance with at least 100-150 grams per day of carbohydrate) during a diet is
probably the best way to go about getting thyroid levels back up while dieting. While this
won't fix a true hypothyroid state, it will help against the ESS related drop in T3 levels
that occur with prolonged dieting.

Leptin

If you’ve read any of my books, you’ve seen me write about leptin. [If not, I’m going to
give you the short course here. Leptin is possibly one of the single most important
hormones in terms of body weight regulation, appetite, etc. Released primarily from fat
cells (muscle, stomach and even the brain also produce leptin), leptin signals the brain
about how much fat you’re carrying and how much you're eating.

Originally it was thought that leptin acted as an ‘anti-obesity’ hormone but this turns out
to be incorrect. Leptin doesn’t do much to prevent folks from gaining weight. Where it
shines is as an ‘anti-starvation’ hormone; leptin controls most of the body’s response to
fasting/caloric restriction/weight loss, acting to slow further weight loss to keep people
alive until food becomes available again.

When someone diets, leptin goes down much faster than fat mass and this has a primary
controlling effect on metabolic rate, hormones, appetite, immune function and a host of
other processes. And while studies that gave injectable leptin to fat people have
consistently crapped out, other studies which replaced leptin to pre-diet levels after weight
loss found improved thyroid levels, increased metabolic rate and continued fat loss. That
is to say, increasing leptin above normal has little effect; keeping leptin from dropping on a
diet has absolutely massive effects.

Leptin stimulates fat oxidation in skeletal muscle and liver, and plays a role in fat
mobilization from fat cells. As well, it impacts on other hormones (e.g. thyroid, cortisol,
estrogen, testosterone) which affect fat cells and fat loss; thus, leptin has both direct and
indirect effects in this regards. That’s in addition to the zillion other things it appears to
do in the body. Injectable leptin would fix most of the problems that occur with dieting;
currently costing $500 PER DAY for an effective dose, this is just another pipe dream.

At maintenance calories, leptin scales frighteningly well with fat mass. Cut calories or get
lean and leptin drops precipitously. In men below 10% body fat,. leptin is often
undetectable in the bloodstream and this is part of what contributes to the general systems
crash that can occur in male bodybuilders dieting to low body fat levels.

At any given level of body fat, women typically produce 2-3 times as much leptin; there is
also some indication that leptin falls faster in women than men and that women’s bodies
may respond differently to this drop. Tangentially, this gender difference in how the body
tesponds to leptin may be part of why women generally have more trouble losing fat than
men. This is currently a topic I’m investigating in great detail and will be the topic of a
future book project.

39

[p.46] Leptin can be modulated somewhat by diet. Dieting of any sort will lower leptin.
Overfeeding with high calories and high carbohydrates (i.e. the refeeds and diet breaks I
talk about in my books) raise it. Other nutrients such as zinc and Vitamin E have been
shown to increase leptin production. Contradictorily, fish oils reduce leptin but they
appear to do this primarily by decreasing body fat levels.

Other hormones such as cortisol and estrogen also impact on leptin levels as well. Cortisol
increases leptin levels, but decreases the sensitivity of tissues to leptin. Estrogen appears to
increase leptin levels and is probably a lot of why women have higher levels than men;
estrogen may also determine leptin sensitivity in women’s brains and recent work suggests
that estrogen may actually mimick many of leptin’s beneficial effects in the brain. :

Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)

So far in this chapter, I’ve focused on hormones that not only have well established effects
on some aspect of fat loss (or stubborn body fat) but that can also be manipulated or
controlled in some way. Before moving onto the topic of the sex hormones, I want to
change gears and talk about a hormone of extreme interest that, as of yet, I’m not sure can
be controlled. However, the possibilities inherent in this hormone are so fascinating with
respect to stubborn fat loss that I think it’s worth mentioning.

That hormone has the involved name of atrial naturiuretic peptide (ANP). ‘Natriuretic
peptides are actually a class of different hormones of which ANP is simply one. Released
from the heart, ANP is involved heavily in water balance (it often goes up in
hypertension, presumably to get rid of some body water and bring things back to normal).

So why is this important for stubborn body fat loss? As it turns out, ANP has been found
to stimulate lipolysis. Nothing exciting there. Except that ANP works through an entirely
new pathway that doesn’t involve the adrenoreceptors. That statement will make a lot
more sense after you’ve read the next chapter but, as I've mentioned previously, different
depots of fat have different ratios of the adrenoceptors and that influences how easy or
difficult it is to mobilize fatty acids. A huge part of the problem with stubborn fat is that
the adrenoreceptor ratios present make it difficult to mobilize stubborn body fat.

A hormone that stimulates lipolysis that works around the adrenoreceptors is something
exciting indeed. Unfortunately, I’ve found no practical way of modulating ANP.
Hyperhydration (achieved with saline infusion) seems to raise ANP but I don’t know if this
is achievable with something like massive water intakes (perhaps with sodium).
Interestingly some bodybuilding contest prep gurus are now recommending massive
sodium intakes during contest prep, along with tons of water; they claim that after the
competitor gets sloppy soft, they start leaning out and dry out. Perhaps this is helping via
an ANP mediated pathway. Perhaps it’s just affecting water balance. In any case, ANP is a
hormone to keep an eye on. We may not be able to do much with it now, but that could
change with new research.

40

[p.47] The sex hormones: Testosterone, estrogen and progesterone

As I mentioned in an earlier chapter, little boys and girls typically have similar body fat
patterns and levels until they hit puberty at which point the typical sex differences in fat
patterns develop.

Of course, since the primary changes that occur at puberty are increases in testosterone
(males) and estrogen/progesterone (females), this suggest a primacy of these hormones in
determining fat patterning and physiology.

Studies of transsexuals clearly bear this out. Male to female transsexuals put on androgen
blockers and female hormones lose their belly fat and develop hip and thigh fat. Female to
male transsexuals who are put on testosterone therapy show a shift to a male fat
patterning, gaining visceral fat and losing hip/thigh fat.

Interestingly, over the long-term, there is often a subsequent return to the previous fat
patterns along with the new ones; that is, male to female transsexuals can end up with
both visceral fat and hip/thigh fat. This is an important point that Ill come back to below
as it is one indication that levels of the hormones per se are not all that’s important.

In a related vein, as females age and enter menopause (at which point their ovaries shut
off), there is often a shift away from female fat patterning (loss of hip/thigh fat) towards
male fat patterning (increase in visceral fat). Females who go on hormone replacement
therapy early enough show no such shift, maintaining the normal female fat pattern.

With regards to stubborn male body fat, testosterone is actually another schizophrenic
hormone; this is because it has effects on both LPL and HSL (discussed in a previous
chapter) depending on the levels of testosterone present. Men with low testosterone
levels will often show fat loss when given testosterone replacement therapy; men who
have above normal levels of testosterone (either genetically or from drug use) often
accumulate visceral fat. Subcutaneous abdominal fat is also responsive to testosterone.

In addition to potentially affecting both fat storage and mobilization via LPL and HSL,
testosterone also affects adrenoreceptor number. While it increases beta-receptor number
(increasing lipolysis), it can also increase alpha-2 receptor number (inhibiting lipolysis).
Depending on which is affected more, this could either help or hurt lipolysis. To my
knowledge, testosterone doesn’t affect adipose tissue blood flow.

Although testosterone clearly plays a role in visceral and abdominal fat accumulation, it
would be fairly silly to suggest lowering testosterone to try and get rid of that fat. Visceral
fat is relatively easy to get rid of (except perhaps in heavy.androgen users) and abdominal
fat will eventually come off if men are patient enough. Testosterone generally crashes
when men get super lean anyhow so it’s not something folks need to worry about or work
to achieve.

Which brings us to the primary female hormones, estrogen and progesterone. Given the
impact of female puberty on female fat patterns, it’s fairly easy to see how the idea that
‘Estrogen causes lower body fat’ came into popularity; that of course leads down the road
to ‘Blocking estrogen will eliminate lower body fat’. If it were only that simple. As Dan

4l

[p.48] Duchaine pointed out years ago, anti-estrogens only helped a little bit with fat loss, they
didn’t solve the problem. Ergo, estrogen alone is not the problem.

If that doesn’t convince you, consider this. As women get super lean, estrogen levels drop;
this is a big part of why the menstrual cycle goes bye bye. Yet losing lower body fat
doesn’t get any easier when this happens. If estrogen were THE cause of stubborn lower
body fat, it should get easier to lose as estrogen drops and that simply isn’t the case. You'll
learn why next chapter.

To say that estrogen is a schizophrenic hormone in’ terms of fat loss and gain is a vast
understatement. I’m tempted to say something poetic like ‘Estrogen is as mysterious as
women themselves’ although my frustration with what these hormones do in the body
makes me more likely to say ‘Estrogen is just as crazy as women themselves’.

Part of the problem is that women show huge shifts up and down in both estrogen and
progesterone during the month and they tend to have over lapping and synchronizing
effects. Figuring out what is being caused by estrogen, what by progesterone and what by
estrogen priming the body for progesterone’s effects is extremely difficult.

Let’s look at some of the conflicting data so you can see why this is more complicated than
saying one or the other is good or bad.

On the one hand, women are known to burn more fat than men during aerobic exercise
especially during the part of their menstrual cycle when estrogen is dominant; quite in fact
if you inject males with estrogen they will burn more fat for fuel during aerobic activity.
This should help fat loss.

However, estrogen can negatively impact on fat mass as well. One study showed that even
acute exposure to estrogen increases alpha-2 receptor number. Estrogen may also directly
lower levels of cAMP by decreasing the activity of one of the key enzymes involved in
producing it in the fat cell. This should hurt fat loss.

Furthermore, postmenopausal women often gain body fat and estrogen/progesterone
replacement can fix this. Studies suggest that estrogen may play a key role in maintaining
proper leptin sensitivity in the brain as well. As mentioned above, estrogen may mimic
many of leptin’s signaling in the brain. This should all help fat loss.

Do you see the problem? Can you see why it’s a huge problem to simply blame estrogen in
this case? Estrogen has effects that are both beneficial and distinctly negative depending
on what tissue and what physiological process you’re looking at. Which brings us to the
next logical question which is ‘Why does estrogen act so strangely?’ Recent research may
have brought us closer to understanding what in the hell is going on.

As it turns out, there are two different estrogen receptors (estrogen receptor alpha and
beta) which are found in different amounts in different tissues; when activated they can
have vastly different end results. This is, in fact, very similar to how the adrenoceptors
work, the ratio of different receptors on a tissue can drastically impact on what actually
happens when the catecholamines are present.

42

[p.49] The existence of two different estrogen receptors actually explains an earlier observation
whereby estrogen antagonists could have anti-estrogenic effects in one tissue but pro-
estrogenic effects in others; different amounts of receptors and binding affinities cause
differential effects to be seen in various tissues. Tangentially current research is trying to
find selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMS) that will allow the effects of the drug
to be much more targeted. In the future it might become possible to block the ‘bad’ effects
of estrogen in terms of fat loss without affecting some of the ‘good’ effects.

If that weren’t complicated enough, estrogen can also exert effects by binding to the
surface of a cell. It may turn out that whether estrogen has an overall positive or negative
impact on fat loss depends on what tissue you’re talking about and whether estrogen is
working through the alpha receptor, beta receptor or cell surface receptors.

And I haven’t even brought up progesterone yet.

Several studies suggest that progesterone is actually the big player in fat storage; however
estrogen primes the progesterone receptor so it can’t be ignored either (before you go
looking for anti-progesterone compounds, note that they all have pretty horrible side-
effect profiles).

In any case, effects on fat storage or gain may be the synchronized effect of estrogen and
progesterone at play, or there may be something else going on entirely. At this point, it’s
just really hard to get to the bottom of this issue and tease out the individual effects of
each hormone.

And the above is only dealing with the effects of estrogen/progesterone on fat storage or
oxidation. Both also clearly also affect appetite (the drop in estrogen appears to be the
cause of increased appetite towards the end of the cycle moreso than the increase in
progesterone) and can cause water retention; this can mask true fat loss. I suspect that
some of the perceived effect of various anti-estrogen compounds (such as di-indole
methane or indole-3 carbinole, compounds found in broccoli that impact on estrogen
metabolism) has to do with dropping water more than actually affecting body fat.

Looking at metabolic rate, while estrogen has no effects I’m aware of, progesterone is
thermogenic and can raise metabolic rate by 3-5%. Of course, during that week of the
cycle is when hunger is generally off the map and it’s easy for most women to out-eat the
slight metabolic boost that progesterone gives.

Sufficed to say, and this is really my main point, estrogen isn’t the sole cause of women’s
lower body fat problems for reasons I hope I’ve made clear. At least not in the sense of

‘Simply taking an anti-estrogen will make all of the problems magically disappear.’

But it may still be playing a huge role in another sense, which I'll discuss next chapter.

43

[p.50] Why is Stubborn Fat Stubborn

stubborn. Perhaps you've picked up some of the reasons by inference but finally, in

S: you're now nearly 50 pages into this book and still wondering why stubborn fat is
this chapter I'‘can put everything together.

Fat cell overview/ review

In the past 6 chapters, you’ve learned a ton about fat cells and fat cell metabolism. One of
the points I’ve tried to get across is that fat cells are not the same, different depots have
different functional characteristics in terms of how easily they store fat, how easily they
give up that fat, etc.

In general there are clear gender differences that show up at puberty, suggesting that sex
hormones play a role in how fat cells develop. And there is much truth to this. However,
that’s not all that’s going on. 0 ‘

It turns out that if you take a fat cell from a man’s thigh and a woman’s thigh, they are
functionally identical and essentially indistinguishable physiologically. This is true even
though the man generally has extremely low levels of estrogen. His lower body fat cells are
still identical to a woman's. The difference, practically, is that men don’t generally store
fat in their legs and women do (i.e. the fat cells in a man’s legs are emptier than in the
woman’s). As I mentioned before, men who do store fat in their lower body have the same
problems as women. But most men don’t store fat there.

The same holds true for visceral or abdominal fat from a woman versus a man. The female’s
visceral/ab fat is physiologically identical to the man’s, although she has very low levels of
testosterone. It’s simply that, on average, she won’t tend to store fat in that area. Again,
the fat cells are identical, the difference is in the propensity to store calories there or not.

What this suggests is that fat cells in different areas of the body have certain physiological
characteristics that occur irrespective of hormone levels. So while the hormonal setting
may affect where ingested calories get sent, they aren’t really controlling the underlying
physiology of the fat cells. :

45

[p.51] Which is fundamentally why blocking estrogen doesn’t fix the lower body fat problem.
Lower body fat cells act a certain way whether estrogen is present or not, that’s how they
are genetically wired to act. The same goes for abdominal fat. Regardless of the person’s
testosterone levels, abdominal fat cells are simply wired to be a certain way. Now it’s time
to learn what that wiring is and what makes stubborn fat cells stubborn.

Adrenoceptor redux

Recall from Chapter 5 that there are two types of adrenoceptors that control not only fat
cell metabolism but also blood flow into and out of the fat cell. Beta-2-receptors can be
thought of as the ‘good’ receptors, increasing lipolysis and adipose tissue blood flow. In
contrast, alpha-2-receptors are distinctly bad, inhibiting lipolysis and adipose tissue blood
flow.

So why does this matter? Different areas of body fat have different distributions of alpha-2
and beta-2 adrenoreceptors and this profoundly affects how well or poorly fat can be
mobilized and transported out of the fat cell.

The most extreme example of this is lower body fat (hips and thighs), which have been
found, to have roughly 9 times as many alpha-2 receptors as beta-2 receptors. Some
research suggests that men’s abdominal fat has higher alpha-2 receptor density (relative to
say, visceral fat) although it’s not as bad as lower body fat. While not studied, lower back
fat is likely to also be relatively resistant to lipolytic stimuli due to a greater alpha-2
Teceptor number.

This is clearly part of why stubborn fat is so stubborn, the normal lipolytic stimuli that
should mobilize fatty acids don’t work effectively. Quite in fact, due to the high alpha-2
receptor density, certain types of exercise can actually be anti-lipolytic. You'll learn more
about that in the next chapter.

Now couple that with the information I presented earlier about how men and women
store calories after eating. Women’s bodies may preferentially shuttle calories into lower
body fat after a meal, on top of possibly redistributing fat from upper to lower body fat.
Yet, they can’t be mobilized out as rapidly due to the adrenoceptor ratios. Basically it’s a
double whammy: women tend to store more fat in their lower bodies after meals, their
bodies may transfer fat from the upper to lower body, yet they can’t as easily get the fat
back out.

Years ago ] remember some women claiming that while their upper bodies leaned out, they
swore their legs were getting fatter. I dismissed it as nonsense at the time but the above
physiological facts lend support to that idea. A woman might be mobilizing fat from her
upper body fine, yet storing some of that fat (or incoming calories from meals) in lower
body fat later in the day. Upper body gets leaner, lower body gets fatter. My friend Elzi
Volk said it best years ago ‘When it comes to fat loss, women are screwed.’ She had no
idea. .

46

[p.52] Blood flow redux

In addition to differences in responsiveness to lipolytic stimuli, certain fat depots have
significantly poorer blood flow than others. You can test this yourself, touch an area of
your body where you lose fat easily, it should feel fairly warm. Now touch your butt, hips
or thighs. Probably stone cold.

Studies have shown that blood flow in the lower body fat may be as much as 67% lower
than in other depots and this holds true for both men and women. Visceral fat has
extremely good blood flow, it also goes away very quickly. If you could drive your hand
into someone’s stomach and feel their visceral fat, it would probably feel fairly warm.

Poor blood flow has two consequences of importance here. First and foremost, it means
that blood borne hormones (such as the catecholamines which, recall, don’t work well to
mobilize stubborn body fat in the first place) can’t get to the fat cells. Second, poor blood
flow makes it harder to get mobilized fat away from the fat cell so that it can be burned
elsewhere.

Why the blood flow is so poor isn’t well established. Part of it may simply be fewer blood
vessels, imaging studies show very few in that area. As well, it appears that the blood
vessels in the lower body have more alpha- than beta-receptors; this has the same
consequence as for lipolysis. More alpha-receptors means more vasoconstriction and less
vasodilation which adds up to less blood flow.

Insulin redux

As I noted, after a meal, blood flow to the lower body increases preferentially in women,
due to the effects of insulin. Lower body fat is also more sensitive overall to the anti-
lipolytic stimuli of insulin. Contrast that to visceral fat which is not only super-sensitive
to lipolytic stimuli but also relatively insensitive to insulin. Ab fat is somewhere in the
middle for both, somewhat sensitive to insulin, somewhat sensitive to the lipolytic effects
of the catecholamines.

Differential fatty acid storage

Another factor that I haven’t discussed yet has to do with a relatively unknown fact about
fat cell metabolism. Studies have shown that the type of fat stored (e.g. saturated versus
unsaturated) affects how well it is mobilized from the fat cell. Unsaturated fats are
mobilized more easily than saturated fats and the polyunsaturated fats (i.e. fish oils) are
mobilized the most easily of all.

What this means is that the more unsaturated/polyunsaturated fat that is stored in the fat
cell, the easier it will be to get out. This is also a big part of why fish oil supplementation is
so crucial while dieting, the body preferentially depletes its own body stores for energy.

Guess what the punch line of this section is? Stubborn fat depots are more likely to store
saturated fat than unsaturated or polyunsaturated fat. You can test this out too, pinch

47

[p.53] some of the fat in a relatively easy to lose area. It should be soft and somewhat squishy.
Now pinch your thigh or butt fat. Hard as a rock, right? That’s because saturated fat is
structurally different than unsaturated fats (saturated fats are solid at room temperature,
unsaturated fats are liquid).

Now, before continuing on in this chapter and summing up, I want to make a practical
comment about the difference in fatty acid type between depots. And that comment is
basically that, while I can tell you how to modulate everything else I’m discussing in this
book, what type of fat you currently have stored in your fat cells right now is out of your
control. What you’ve eaten over the last 20 or 30 years while storing your current body
fat determines the types of fat stored there. If you're dieting down for the first time, -
there’s simply nothing you can do about it. :

However, after your diet is over and you regain some fat (trust me, you will), what you can
do is try to keep saturated fat intake down and unsaturated/polyunsaturated fat intake
higher while you’re doing it. That alone should make your next extreme diet easier since
the fat stored in your fat cells will now be the easier to mobilize
unsaturated/polyunsaturated fats. I don’t usually quibble that much over food quality but
this is one place where, practically, it might make a difference in the long run.

Fat cell size

Another issue that potentially contributes is fat cell size which turns out to impact on a
number of aspects of fat cell physiology, especially lipolysis (which is greater in larger fat
cells). As fat cells shrink, lipolysis decreases.

Of more relevance, some people seem to have relatively more but smaller fat cells while
others have fewer but larger cells. The latter group will, generally, have an easier time
dropping fat. However, that I can tell, research hasn’t consistently identified differences
between fat cell depots in terms of size versus number. Rather, it may just be the genetic
lottery that determines this. In any case, it’s out of your control and not worth worrying
about. I mention it only for completeness.

Amore global issue

Of course, moving a little beyond the issue of fat cells themselves, there’s another big
reason that stubborn fat is stubborn and that has to do with when it has a chance to come
off in the first place. That time, of course, is at the end of a long diet. As I’ve noted, the
body will always take the easier to mobilize fat first and only when that’s gone will it even
touch the stubborn fat.

Again, that generally comes after a long dieting period and there are lots of other factors
occurring then that conspire to make stubborn fat harder to get off. The first are
hormones: leptin levels will be down, thyroid will be down, cortisol will be up, nervous
system output is typically down. This causes an overall reduction in metabolic rate and
lipolysis above and beyond the issues discussed above. Of course, fat cells are smaller at
this point, which further inhibits lipolysis. Typically dieters are starting to get hungry,

48

[p.54] pose

making it more likely that they'll break their diet and stop fat loss in its tracks.
Motivation is often down and maintaining training intensity in the face of a seemingly
endless diet becomes difficult.

Short of using various strategies (nutrition or drug) to try and fix the hormonal issues,
about the only thing that can be done is the proper implementation of refeeds and diet
breaks to try and restore hormones to something approximating normal to help the fat
come off a bit easier. I'll talk about this in a bit more detail in later chapters but interested
teaders should either pick up my UD2 or Guide to Flexible Dieting which deals with
the issues I’ve mentioned here in some detail.

Summing up

So this chapter basically is the first punch line of the book, finally defining,
physiologically, what makes stubborn fat so stubborn. And, rather than being any single
hormone or factor, it’s essentially a combination of issues including adrenoceptor number
(which determines the sensitivity to lipolytic stimuli), blood flow, sensitivity to insulin,
what type of fat is stored, and whether the fat cells are small and numerous or large and
less numerous. Of those five factors, three are under our immediate control, the last two
are not. Table 1 summarizes the first three factors for the different types of body fat.

Table 1: Comparison of Characteristics of Different Fat Depots

Fat depot Lipolytic Insulin Blood Ease of
Sensitivity Sensitivity Flow loss
Visceral fat Very high Very low Very high Very easy
Abdominal* Moderate ; Moderate Moderate Moderate
Hip/thigh Very low Very high Very low Very hard
—__|

*Recall that abdominal fat can be further subdivided into deep, superficial upper and superficial lower
depots with ease of loss going easiest, medium hardest, hardest respectively.

Additionally, there is the global fact of how the body adapts to long-term dieting.
Reductions in metabolic rate, thyroid, leptin, nervous system output, etc. all make it
harder to reduce fat mass in general, this just compounds the problems already associated
with stubborn fat.

In any case, having identified what makes stubborn fat stubborn, we can (finally) set about

figuring out how to overcome the problem. Clearly finding a way to overcome the issue of
a high alpha- to beta-receptor ratio is a first key. Improving blood flow into and out of the

49

[p.55] cell is the second key. Avoiding issues with high insulin sensitivity (or simply a
propensity to store fat in the first place) is the final key.

Again, nothing can be done in the short-term about the type of fat stored in stubborn fat
depots; that can only be dealt with after the fat has been emptied in the first place. Fat
cell number and size is outside of our control as well, I mention it only for completeness.

Dealing with the global issue of dieting adaptations is a matter of properly used refeeds, diet
breaks and either supplements or drugs to fix the metabolic problems.

And now, with that out of the way, we can start moving on to more practical aspects of .

stubborn fat, looking at how diet, training and supplements affect the issues discussed
above.

30

[p.56] Diet, Exercise and Supplements

fat so stubborn. I finished that chapter by listing three factors that we might affect

(along with two that we can’t) to directly contro] fat metabolism: these were alpha- to
beta-adrenoceptor ratios. (which directly affects how well fat is mobilized from fat cells),
blood flow (which is also under some control by adrenoreceptors), and the impact of
insulin on inhibiting lipolysis.

[ the last chapter, I finally explained what, physiologically speaking, makes stubborn

As a more global factor, I mentioned the impact of long-term dieting on overall fat loss in
terms of reducing metabolic rate, lowering thyroid, leptin and nervous system output, etc.
This is something that we can modulate to a limited degree to help with getting rid of
stubborn body fat as well.

Obviously, the factors that are within our control in regards to the above issues are diet,
training, and supplements. Some might add drugs but I’m not going to address those in
any detail in this book.

At least two things will come out of this chapter. First it will lay the groundwork for me to
explain the specific protocols for getting rid of stubborn fat in the next two chapters. And,
as promised, you'll learn why one of the most commonly used approaches to dieting
(generally advocated by male coaches) is about the single worst thing a female could do to
address stubborn lower body fat.

I'm making a number of assumptions about the knowledge base of my readers at this point.
If you’re lean enough and have dieted long enough to need the information in this book, I
feel it’s safe to assume that you don’t a need basic course in either nutrition or training. If
you don’t know a carbohydrate from a protein or interval training from steady state
aerobics, you have bigger problems than this book can fix. |

Abit about hormones and agonists/ antagonists
To understand the next section, I need to give a bit of background on hormones and

define a couple of terms. Some have likened the way that hormones work as a key fitting
into a lock; each lock requires a specific key and this is how hormone work. The old idea

51

[p.57] was that each lock had one specific key but this turns out to be simplistic. Some receptors
can respond to multiple hormones. For example, progesterone can bind to the androgen
receptor (which normally binds testosterone).

Now, with that understanding I need to explain the concept of a receptor agonist and
antagonist. A receptor agonist is any compound that activates a specific receptor, in the
same way that the bodies own hormones would. Essentially, an agonist looks enough like
the normal key to fit into the lock, causing stuff to happen.

In contrast, a receptor antagonist does the opposite. When it binds to the receptor in
question, it either sends a negative signal or, by preventing the body's normal hormone
from binding, prevents the normal signal from being sent. In either case the end result is
the same: an antagonist blocks the effects of a given receptor. Stretching the key/lock
analogy to its limits, an antagonist pretends to be the right key and then either sends a
negative signal or simply prevents the right key from going into the lock.

So let’s consider a beta-agonist compound such as ephedrine. By binding to the beta-
receptor, a beta-agonist will raise blood pressure and heart rate (in addition to hopefully
affecting lipolysis). Similarly, if we used a beta-receptor antagonist, we would block the
effect of beta-receptors, preventing heart rate and blood pressure from rising. Drugs called
beta-blockers decrease lipolysis and heart rate/blood pressure by decreasing (antagonizing)
beta-receptor activity.

In a related vein, an alpha-agonist compound would activate alpha-receptors. This would
slow heart rate, lower blood pressure and decrease lipolysis in fat cells. An alpha-antagonist
compound (I'll describe one below) would have the opposite effect: it would tend to raise
blood pressure and heart rate and increase lipolysis. If this is unclear, you can think of an
alpha-antagonist as acting like a double negative. Normally alpha-2 receptors inhibit
lipolysis. Well if you inhibit an inhibitor, the net result is stimulation. Got it?

Adrenoceptors one more time

Since I can’t assume that you didn’t just turn to this chapter without reading the previous
chapters, I want to go over the whole adrenoreceptor issue one more time. Recall that fat
cells and blood vessels (and most tissues in the body) have some combination of alpha-
and beta-receptors.

You can essentially think of beta-receptors as accelerators of whatever system you're
looking at. Agonism of beta-receptors will increase heart rate, increase blood pressure and
increase lipolysis. Similarly, you can think of alpha-receptors as acting like a brake. When
activated, they lower heart rate, lower blood pressure and inhibit lipolysis. From the
standpoint of fat loss, beta-receptors are ‘good’ and alpha-receptors are ‘bad’.

What this means is that there are basically two approaches to increasing lipolysis. The first
is via beta-receptor agonism. Exercise does this, so do compounds like ephedrine and
clenbuterol; caffeine even has mild effects. And this works just fine for fat cells that have
lots of beta-receptors and not too many alpha-receptors.

52

[p.58] But as you learned, stubborn fat often has more alpha-receptors than beta-receptors. And
since the same hormones can bind to both receptor types, the end result of just trying to
raise certain hormones (such as the catecholamines) may not have the intended effect. It
all depends on the ratios of adrenoceptors as well as the levels of each hormone present.

The upshot is that, to best target stubborn fat, we need to block the effects of alpha-
receptors. Alternately, we can exert such a profound hormonal effect that beta-stimulation
still wins out. Of course, we can use a combination of the two, blocking alpha-receptor
activity and increasing beta-receptor activity for maximum results.

A quick note of warning: recall from above that tissues like the heart have both alpha- and
beta-receptors and that heart rate and blood pressure are sensitive to both. Inhibiting
alpha-receptors while stimulating beta-receptors can often do absurd things to heart rate
and blood pressure. You can think of it as revving the accelerator (via beta-receptor
stimulation) while taking the brake off (by inhibiting alpha-receptor activity). Of course,
by the time most dieters are at stubborn body fat level, blood pressure and heart rate are so
low from dieting that this tends to be a non-issue. However, that doesn’t mean that it
can’t be a problem. Combining beta-agonists with alpha-antagonists can cause problems
with heart rate and blood pressure in susceptible individuals; simply be aware of this
potential interaction.

Ok, so we can attack this problem from two ends: alpha-receptor antagonism or massive
beta-receptor agonism. Or both. First let’s look at diet and how it affects things.

Chronic (four days or more) low-carbohydrate (20% or less of total calories from carbs)
diets inhibit alpha-receptors naturally. Of course, lowering carbs also reduces insulin
which is beneficial in limiting the anti-lipolytic effect of insulin on stubborn fat cells. Of
potentially greater benefit, low-carb diets tend to naturally increase catecholamine levels
(the hormonal response to exercise is also increased), which will tend to have benefits on
fat loss as well. Low-carbohydrate diets also increase the catecholamine response to other
stimuli such as ephedrine, caffeine or exercise.

Empirically, people have noticed that low-carb diets seem to increase stubborn/lower body
fat mobilization and the above mechanism, along with the reduction in insulin levels, is
clearly part of the reason. I used this approach in my Ultimate Diet 2.0 and it’s a
possibility here as well. However, as not everyone is able to do a low-carb diet for
extended periods, it’s not the only approach I’m going to present.

Even if dieters don’t go to a strictly low-carbohydrate diet, reducing insulin by lowering
total carbohydrate quantity (even if the diet is non-ketogenic) or quality (by choosing
lower Glycemic Index carbs) or both will be helpful. Nobody knows for sure where the
carb cutoff is to get the natural inhibition of alpha-2 receptors; that is, do carbs have to be
reduced to 20% or can they be kept at a higher level while still obtaining the benefits? For
that reason, I’ll use 20% as the cutoff point: to naturally inhibit alpha-2 receptors, you will
need to reduce carbohydrates to 20% of total calorie or less for at least four days.

However, for individuals who don’t want to use a strict low-carbohydrate diet (many can’t

train effectively or find that it negatively affects their mood and energy levels), there is a
supplement option. That option is yohimbe (or yohimbine HCL). Coming from the bark

53

[p.59] of an African tree, yohimbe originally got an (incorrect) reputation as a testosterone
enhancer but it doesn’t affect hormones at all. Rather, it is a naturally occurring alpha-2
receptor antagonist.

If you’re confused about the names, yohimbe is the herbal/bark-derived version,
yohimbine HCL is the synthetic version. For reasons I’m going to explain below, I
strongly recommend that dieters who want to use this compound obtain the synthetic
yohimbine HCL and I'll refer to yohimbine from here on out. Keep in mind that all of my
comments apply equally to both unless otherwise specified.

As mentioned in a previous chapter, alpha-antagonism tends to increase blood flow and
yohimbine is known for having benefits for treating impotence. Back in the day,
anything that gave men wood was assumed to be doing so via testosterone production and
that’s where the idea came from. But again, despite what it says on many supplement
bottles, yohimbine does NOT affect testosterone levels.

However, yohimbine does inhibit alpha-2 receptors and studies have shown that this
increases fatty acid mobilization from stubborn fat.cells. Yohmbe affects not only alpha-2
receptors on fat cells but also will impact on the alpha-2 receptors in the circulation,
improving blood flow. Finally, yohimbine will help keep the body’s production of
noradrenaline higher by inhibiting the normal feedback loop that decreases levels while
dieting. All of the effects of yohimbine do nothing but help with the mobilization of
stubborn body fat. Various studies have shown these effects and one recent study found
that oral yohimbine decreased body fat significantly in soccer players over only 3 weeks of
use.

As above, yohimbe can be found in both herbal and pharmaceutical forms (as yohimbine
HCL). The herbal is not without problems, mainly side effects related to other compounds
found in the bark. Chills accompanied by sweats and severe stimulation can occur with
the herbal; at one time it’s all that could be obtained (Twinlab herbal Yohimbe Fuel was
the only product I ever trusted to contain what it claimed). Unless it’s all you can get, I
don’t recommend the herbal product.

Yohimbine HCL is a much cleaner compound with all of the benefits and few of the side
effects of the herbal. The biggest problem is that Yohimbine HCL can only be sold in 2.5
mg pills; with an effective dose of 0.2 mg/kg (14 mg for a 70 kg athlete), this means having
to swallow a bunch of pills. But it’s worth it to avoid the side effects.

I’d note that the effects of yohimbine are eliminated by even small amounts of insulin
which means that yohimbine needs to be taken several hours from a meal or first thing in
the morning. I'll come back to this in the application chapters. As well, yohimbine ©
increases the insulin response to carbohydrate; for people who fear insulin (you know who
you are), the meal consumed after yohimbine consumption should be lower in
carbohydrates as well.

Note that yohimbine has a sort of passive stimulant effect. By itself it won’t do a whole lot
but it tends to amplify the effects of other stimulating things such as exercise, ephedrine or
caffeine; I don’t recommend it be taken with ephedrine (or within 4 hours of an ephedrine
dose) for this reason. Some people can tolerate it but this is not universal. Taking

54

[p.60] yohimbe before high intensity activities such as weight training or intervals can make
people feel like their heart is going to come out of their chest.

I should also note that yohimbine can cause anxiety attacks in susceptible individuals, by
raising brain levels of noradrenaline. Anyone with such a tendency should not use
yohimbine at any dose.

Interestingly, with chronic long-term use, yohimbine builds up in tissues and the effect on
fat loss seems to accelerate. It’s important to note that yohimbine can also cause water
retention and many dieters find that their fat loss is briefly masked due to this. Going off
yohimbine for about 3 days will have you pissing like a racehorse and should leave you dry
and lean. If bodybuilding is your goal, make sure you do it in time to do water
manipulation stuff for your show. Anyone seeking extreme leanness on a specific date,
will need to do the same for maximal visual impact.

I'd note that oral yohimbine is not perfect in that it will affect all tissues in the body. It
would be better if we could isolate it to fat cells only and various approaches have been
tried. Some maniacs have injected it but the more sane cutting edge approach is to try to
make a topical cream with various other compounds and carriers. I remain incredulous,
the skin has an unbelievably good circulatory system and most of the anecdotal reports
I've seen suggest that topical yohimbine is just ending up in the systemic circulation
anyhow (people still report heart rate/blood pressure increases which shouldn’t occur if
the effect is isolated to fat cells). In my opinion, skip the topical and stick with oral
yohimbine HCL which is, at least, a known quantity.

While I’m talking about topicals, I would note that some intriguing research has
occasionally suggested that these types of products can actually work for ‘spot reduction’
(although some of the early work may have actually simply been measuring water loss).
Early studies used topical theophylline or aminophyilline although I don’t think anybody
ever brought it to market, another product used some type of slimming liposome that had
alpha-2 receptor antagonist activity, I never saw that one commercially either.

One of the more intriguing current bits of research is a topical licorice cream that was
shown to reduce thigh fat. Yes, licorice, the same stuff in the candy. As it turns out, the
active ingredient in licorice, Glycyrrhetinic acid, impacts on cortisol metabolism.
Remember from an earlier chapter that local cortisol metabolism (via 11-beta-HSD) appears
to be very relevant for local fat cell metabolism and the active ingredient in licorice blocks
11-beta-HSD activity. Unfortunately, it seems to have. become impossible to actually
source the stuff and I’ve been unable to test it out. And, no, you can’t just consume tons
of licorice (in candy form or otherwise orally), as this has very negative impacts on
hormone metabolism (lowering testosterone levels for one). But if you can find a topical
licorice product, it may be worth investigating.

And what about exercise? For this section, I have to give a bit more background about the
hormonal response to exercise. To keep things simple I’m going to divide exercise into low
and high intensity and pretend that there’s nothing in the middle. Low intensity activity
is any steady state aerobic exercise that can be done for extended periods below the lactate
threshold (LT, this is the point at which the body starts producing tremendous amounts of
acid, causing fatigue; and yes I know that it’s not an accurate description of what’s going

55

[p.61] on; when I write my book on endurance training, I'll deal with it in detail. Until that
time, let me keep ONE concept in this book simple). Weight training or interval training
(of any high intensity nature) that is done above lactate threshold will be considered high
intensity activity.

Now remember from an earlier chapter that there are two catecholamine hormones,
adrenaline and noradrenaline. Adrenaline is released from the adrenal gland and has to
travel through the bloodstream until it gets to a specific tissue where it exerts its effects. In
contrast, noradrenaline is released from nerve terminals and generally has only local effects
(noradrenaline can often ‘spill out’ into the general circulation if there’s enough of it).
Both can bind to adrenoreceptors and exercise is the primary way of achieving the beta-
receptor activation I talked about above. Compounds such as ephedrine, clenbuterol or
other stimulants do the same thing.

As it turns out, during low intensity activity the primary hormone released is
noradrenaline, with levels increasing as intensity increases. Now noradrenaline does a
plenty fine job of stimulating lipolysis for non-stubborn fat cells where there aren’t too
many more alpha-receptors than beta-receptors. But in stubborn fat, with their
preponderance of alpha-receptors, the low levels of noradrenaline can end up exerting an
anti-lipolytic effect, inhibiting fat release from the fat cell. Don’t misread me, this doesn’t
mean that low intensity activity is useless (the interval freaks reading this were about to
draw that very conclusion), just that it has to be used correctly. I’ll tell you how in the
next chapter.

Now, as exercise intensity goes up, noradrenaline levels continue to increase. Adrenaline
output gradually increases with increasing intensity as well. Until you cross the lactate
threshold, at which point both adrenaline and noradrenaline output increase
exponentially.

So you’re walking, you’re walking, you’re walking and your body is just punting out
noradrenaline from the nerve terminals. Small amounts of adrenaline are being released as
well. Then you break into an all-out run and both adrenaline and noradrenaline get
pumped out like crazy.

This has a number of effects in the body. One is to increase the liver’s production of
glucose (often blood glucose goes up during high intensity activity because the liver makes
it faster than tissues can take it up). Another is that heart rate and blood pressure go
through the roof. Skeletal muscle also starts using tons of glucose for fuel, Producing the
acid that causes burning and fatigue.

Of more importance, high intensity activity seems to be able to overcome the lipolytic
insensitivity associated with stubborn fat. This has to do, with differences in how the
different hormones bind to alpha and beta-receptors. Essentially high intensity work can
overcome some of the problems associated with alpha-receptor dominance in stubborn
body fat. Aha, scream the interval freaks, we knew we were right all along: intervals rule
and steady state drools.

Hold on, I’m not finished.

56

[p.62] While the hormonal response to interval training does some nice things as far as breaking
down fatty acids in the fat cell is concerned, there is also a downside. At high intensities
of exercise, the body doesn’t burn fatty acids for fuel, preferring to use glucose instead.
Additionally, high levels of lactate (released into the bloodstream from exercising muscle)
traps fatty acids in the fat cells. As it turns out that there is a rather large release of fatty
acids into the bloodstream about 5 minutes after high intensity activity ends and the
lactate induced block is released. You'll see how this factors into the protocols in Chapter
10.

So all is not perfect in interval lover’s land in this regards. But, you say, the
afterburn/post-exercise calorie burn effect will take care of it. Nope, remember that
stubborn body fat has poor blood flow and will happily re-esterify those now mobilized
fatty acids. The end result is no result because all of the fatty acids that were mobilized
(but not burned off) during the exercise bout simply get stored again.

So even if high intensity activity better mobilizes the fatty acids (and it does), it doesn’t
magically solve all of the problems. You may have an inkling of how to solve them based
on what I’ve written above, or you may not. Better odds are you saw someone present my
original stubborn fat protocol and know what my original solution was. But I’m getting
ahead of myself. Let me finish up this section before I move onto the next topic of adipose
tissue blood flow.

On a related note, research has shown that doing exercise in a mode that you don’t
usually use increases the hormonal response. So if you always use the EFX, you'll get a
greater adrenaline/noradrenaline response if you use the Stairmaster or Treadmill or
whatever. I’ll come back to this when I talk about application and how to optimize the
stubborn fat protocol.

Now you know basically how adrenoceptor function is mediated by diet, training and
supplements. We can inhibit alpha-receptors naturally with either a very low
carbohydrate diet or by using oral yohimbine/yohimbe. We can increase beta-receptor
activation several different ways. Low-carbohydrate diets will do this naturally to some
degree, compounds such as caffeine and ephedrine can do it. And exercise is arguably the
most potent weapon in our arsenal to accomplish the goal of beta-receptor stimulation.

Adipose tissue blood flow (ATBF)

Having figured out how to mobilize fatty acids from stubborn fat cells, the next step to
address is ATBF and how to increase it. “

As it turns out, much of what I discussed in the previous section holds for blood flow as
well since ATBF is controlled by the same adrenoceptors that control lipolysis.

Inhibiting alpha-receptors can only increase ATBF and it’s been shown that blood flow

increases with long-term fasting. While fasting is inappropriate for a lean dieter, low-
carbohydrate diets mimic fasting and may have the same impact on ATBF.

37

[p.63] If a low-carbohydrate diet isn’t workable, oral yohimbine will have similar effects on blood
flow as it does on lipolysis, inhibiting alpha-receptors. Again, chronic use will cause a
tissue buildup and have increasingly greater effects.

Even aerobic activity has been shown to overcome the sluggish blood flow of stubborn fat
although, based on hormonal considerations, I’d expect high intensity work to have a
greater impact. Just keep in mind the negatives I mentioned above in how lactate inhibits
fatty acid release and how fat oxidation is blunted at high intensities.

As I mentioned previously, temperature seems to impact on ABTF as well, it’s conceivable
that wearing those silly rubber wraps could have an impact. You certainly wouldn’t want
to try to attack stubborn fat in the cold. I’d note that duration of exercise also impacts
ATBF although it takes something like 4 hours before any major effect is seen. Leave that
to the endurance guys.

As I mentioned previously, most other approaches to improving ATBF are hamstrung by
the fact that the same compounds that increase ABTF often inhibit lipolysis. Adenosine
(released from fat cells), nitric oxide and insulin all increase ATBF but inhibit lipolysis,
making them essentially unworkable.

Insulin levels

There’s not much to say about insulin that I haven’t touched on already in this chapter.
Reducing insulin will mainly be a function of reducing carbohydrate quantity (amount),
quality (type), or both. As I mentioned, there are different effects of reducing quantity
versus quality in terms of insulin resistance and fatty acid release. Reducing quantity tends
to cause insulin resistance (again, a good thing on a diet) and increases fatty acid release,
keeping total carbohydrate intake high but choosing lower GI carbs has neither effect.
Choosing different quality carbs (in this case, less insulinogenic carbs) while reducing
carbohydrates also impacts on this.

The main thing to keep in mind is that insulin should be lowered prior to attacking
stubborn body fat. Which doesn’t meant that a low-carbohydrate diet is the default.
Again, there are several possible options.

One is to do the protocols I’m going to describe in the next chapter first thing in the
morning before eating. Now, fasted cardio is an area of huge debate; under most
conditions I don’t think it makes an iota of difference when cardio is done. Stubborn fat is
one of the places where it might. ”

I'd note that some of the people who originally tested my first stubborn fat protocol did it
without changing their diet, with no supplements, and not fasted and it still worked. I’m
just awesome that way.

However, going into the protocol with insulin lowered to some degree is not a bad idea.
Again, this could mean doing it fasted first thing in the morning. If that’s not possible or
preferred, it could be done within the context of a very low-carbohydrate diet (which
keeps insulin low all day). If that’s not workable and the dieter is on a carb-based diet, the

38

[p.64] protocol can be done at least 3 hours after the previous meal. This will allow insulin to
have gone down somewhat from whatever carbohydrates were consumed.

Finally I’d note that even low intensity aerobic activity lowers insulin rapidly. Even
performing an easy 5-10 minute warm-up prior to any other activity will lower insulin,
removing the normal anti-lipolytic block that would otherwise be in place.

A few other dietary comments

Although this doesn’t relate specifically to the mobilization or transport of stubborn body
fat, ’d note that diet can impact on how well or poorly fat is oxidized by skeletal muscle.
Lowering carbohydrate intake, especially in conjunction with exercise that depletes
muscle glycogen, is known to enhance whole body fat oxidation. This is yet another
potential benefit of reducing carbohydrate when attacking stubborn body fat.

In practice, most dieters at that level of leanness will already be reducing carbohydrates to
some degree or another. Since training will tend to deplete muscle glycogen, it may not be
necessary to address this issue explicitly. However, adding some type of higher rep
glycogen depleting exercise (e.g. high rep weight training) to the normal diet of heavy
work (to maintain muscle mass) may be beneficial for ensuring that mobilized fat from
stubborn body fat is burned more effectively. My Ultimate Diet 2.0 goes into more
detail on this.

Again, while this doesn’t necessarily impact directly on stubborn fat mobilization,
transport, or burning, there may be a potential benefit to attacking the fat storage issue.
This is especially true for women. Given the issues I’ve addressed in previous chapters, and
the possibility that women’s bodies may find a way to mobilize fat from the upper body
while storing it in the lower body, ensuring that fat isn’t being stored following meals is a
worthwhile strategy.

This brings us back to the MCTs and DGs I discussed early in this book. Replacing a
majority of the dietary fat you’re eating (while ensuring daily fish oil intake) could be
beneficial in ensuring that ingested dietary fat is being burned in the liver with no chance
of storage in lower body fat cells. It also may make no impact at all except to make your
diet that much more bland and unpleasant.

In the last chapter, I mentioned briefly the global issues involved with dieting that can
negatively impact on stubborn fat loss indirectly. This has to do with what happens to
leptin, thyroid, etc. during a long-term diet. If you’ve read any of my last books, you
know about free meals, refeeds and diet breaks. In this context, refeeds (lasting from 5-24
hours) and full diet breaks (lasting 10-14 days) are the most relevant.

Empirically, I’ve often noticed that stubborn fat mobilization seems to be better (I'll
explain how I ‘know’ this in the next chapter) the day after a reefed (a period of high-
carbohydrate over-feeding). So after a S-hour refeed on a Wednesday night, stubborn fat
mobilization seemed better during stubborn fat protocols done the next morning. Perhaps
raising leptin helps with fat mobilization. Perhaps pushing some water into the fat cells
increases their volume (remember that fat cell size impacts on metabolism). Perhaps I’m

59

[p.65] totally full of shit on this point and hallucinated it. I accept all of these as possibilities.
But it is worth trying when fat loss stalls, inserting a reefed and following it the next day
with one of the 4 stubborn fat protocols may be helpful in shifting the last bit of stubborn
fat.

And then there are diet breaks. As I’ve said before, 1 think most people diet too long
without a break. Fat loss slows, they overtrain, metabolism crashes completely and they
end up banging their head against the wall for no gains (more accurately, no fat Josses).
Better at that point to come back to maintenance calorie levels, bring carbs to 100-150
g/day minimum, cut training back to allow recovery to occur, and do that for 10-14 days
before continuing the assault on stubborn body fat. You would have to plan it into your
dieting period of course but it works better, trust me.

Boys have a penis, girls have a vagina

Other than the obvious issue relating to hormones and fat patterning, for the most part
I’ve treated men and women similarly throughout this book. But I told you up front that
one of the things you’d find out by this point was why one of the strategies that is often
advocated by male coaches (and which works fine for them) ends up being absolutely the
worst thing a female can do to get rid of stubborn body fat.

Of course, these same male coaches are usually still stuck in 1982 blaming estrogen and
thinking that Nolvadex (an anti-estrogen drug) will fix all the problems. And when their
girl’s legs don’t come in, they just throw more drugs at the problem. And it still doesn’t
work.

Remember from previous chapters that, no matter how you cut it, men’s abdominal fat is
never ever ever as stubborn as women’s lower body fat. It’s more sensitive to lipolytic
stimuli and less sensitive to insulin, it responds well enough to normal cardio approaches
such that nothing special is usually needed to get rid of it except patience.

Sure, low back fat can be a bear and with striated glutes becoming required to win shows in
natural bodybuilding, men seeking extreme leanness now have to deal with that issue too.
Just throw more clen, thyroid and GH at it. Men usually tolerate higher carbohydrates
better than woman (for reasons I don’t want to get in to). That’s on top of all of the other
natural hormonal differences.

At the professional level (and many bodybuilding coaches are pro-bodybuilders
themselves), the inherent advantages that male dieters have are further accentuated by
the drugs that are being used. Simply throwing the same drugs at women and expecting
them to have the same effect is silly and doesn’t always work.

What this means is that a male can often get contest ripped eating lots of carbohydrates
and doing nothing more esoteric than fasted morning cardio. Women, generally speaking,

can’t.

Hopefully by this point in the book you have an idea why. Women’s lower body fat is
profoundly sensitive to insulin meaning that too many carbohydrates will make it damn

60

[p.66] near impossible to mobilize stubborn body fat in the first place. Add to that what I
discussed about the hormonal response to very low intensity steady state cardio, the small
noradenaline response can end up having an anti-lipolytic effect.

Even done fasted, if the diet is chronically carb-based, with nothing but low intensity
cardio, lower body fat will never come off. And no amount of anti-estrogens or other
compounds will fix the problem. Even adding oral yohimbine would do most of the work
but most coaches seem to be unaware of that compound. I guess none of them read
BodyOpus.

So you end up with male bodybuilders, who have no problems getting contest lean on
carb based diets and low intensity morning cardio giving women the same advice. And it
doesn’t work. In fact, it’s about the single worst thing that could be done.

Between the extreme sensitivity of lower body fat to insulin, coupled with the fact that
low-intensity exercise can end up having an anti-lipolytic stimuli, coupled with an odd
phenomenon whereby women may be able to redistribute fat from their upper to lower
bodies (or simply store incoming dietary fat in lower body fat without remobilizing them),
not only don’t the legs lean out with the typical male approach, sometimes women’s legs
actually can get fatter.

Summary

This chapter is too involved to summarize. Read it again and pretend you're doing bullet
points and call that the summary. It’s finally time to get to the protocols themselves.

61

[p.67] The Stubborn Fat Protocols: Introduction

e’re almost there. You've made it through over 50 pages of detailed
information about fat cell metabolism and physiology, you know more about
fat cells than you thought there was to know (or ever wanted to know). And
I’m still not going to give you the protocols. Rather, in this chapter I want to cover some

introductory information that is crucial to what I’m going to talk about in Chapter 10.
Please don’t skip it, it’s important.

Four protocols for four situations

In the next chapter, I’m (finally) going to present four distinct protocols that integrate all
of the information from the previous chapters (especially Chapter 8). Although I’m going
to present them in order from least to most complex, I want to make it very clear that they
aren’t being presented in any order of importance or as a progression that you should
follow. We are all unique snowflakes (just like mommy said) and each reader’s individual
needs and situation will determine which protocol is most appropriate.

Although all of the protocols I’m going to present work well, depending on the context, I
do have a special affinity for the Stubborn Fat Protocol 2.0 (SFP2.0) for one big reason.
The stubborn fat issue has been a topic I’ve pursued for over 10 years now and this book
and the SFP2.0 represent the culmination of that work.

I’ve accumulated stacks of research for over a decade that have gone into writing this
project; I’ve been carrying them with me in a big box while adding to them as new
research came out. I’ve tweaked, played and tested various ideas and kept my eye out for
any bit of data that could fix the problem once and for‘all. Once I present the newly
developed SFP2.0, I feel that I'll have said everything I have to say about the topic and I
can move onto the next project that will consume my every waking thought.

In the same way that I’m not presenting the individual protocols as a sequence or in order
of importance, nor should they seen as mutually exclusive of one another. Some of them
can be used together. As you'll see, some of them should be used together for optimal
results.

63

[p.68] The more advanced protocols (including the original SFP) are not appropriate to use daily
which leads me into one bit of ranting that I want to get out of the way before continuing
this chapter.

The obligatory warning

It’s not an over-exaggeration to say that individuals trying to strip off that last bit of fat
came become a bit obsessed. A little less kindly: most of them lose their freaking mind
towards the end of the diet.

It’s easy enough to overtrain on a diet, most people in my experience train too hard too
often without taking a break. They destroy themselves and, as often as not, they still
don’t get to where they want to be.

Now, a problem with modern dieting is that, for reasons ranging from reasonable to
completely wrong, old school steady state cardio has gotten a bad rap. Never mind that
four decades of bodybuilders got contest lean with nothing but low-intensity cardio; many
have been convinced that steady state is either worthless (or in some cases actively
detrimental) to fat loss. This is sheer nonsense, of course; I’m simply reporting what I’m
seeing others advocate or attempt to do in practice. Clearly I disagree completely.

The fact is, right or wrong, most people who are trying to eliminate the last bit of stubborn
fat (whether for a contest or another goal) do some type of training nearly daily when
they are contest dieting; many train more than once daily.

This would be fine if they’d stay sane and keep the intensity of their training under
control. Unfortunately, many don’t. If someone has been convinced that low-intensity
work is useless, and they want to do metabolic work every day, where exactly does that
leave them? It leaves them trying to handle a training load that no human being eating a
lot of calories could recover from, and they try to do it while dieting. I’d note, and I'll try
to do so without being ugly about it, that some contest prep coaches are advocating this
stupidity. Dieters are getting destroyed.

In addition, there’s this weird mentality by which people think that their training volume
and frequency should go UP when dieting; this is backwards as recovery is always
hampered when calories are restricted. Realistically, this idea came about in the 80’s when
bodybuilders started really using anabolics to help with bodybuilding contest prep. This
had the effect of artificially elevating recovery ability and allowed for insane levels
training; it also gave naturals a false idea of what they could or should do. Without drugs,
this can’t work and natural dieters simply get nuked. They overtrain, lose muscle mass
and end up giving up before reaching their goals.

I’m bringing this up here because both the SFP1.0 and 2.0 are very intense; dieters who
lose sight of that can get into real problems. I’ve heard some crazy stories, at least one of
which I'll describe later. You can’t do the protocols every day. You can’t do them even
every other day under most circumstances. At best, the SFP1.0/2.0 can be done twice
weekly and the occasional freak of nature might get away with it three times weekly.

64

[p.69] I want to make it clear that, despite my little joke above about you being a unique
snowflake, you are not the exception to this. You are not the person who can handle
high intensity interval training daily without ruining yourself. Especially if you’re doing it
while resistance training your legs heavy twice/week (as many do). Something will give: it
might be your knees and it might be your mind. But you can’t do it and J encourage you
not to try. I won’t repeat myself, this should suffice. Simply realize that if you ignore my
warnings, you're setting yourself up for some real problems.

Ok, back to the book

Hopefully you realize that trying to do the higher intensity protocols described in the
next chapter every day won’t work. If not, please read the previous bit again. Yet, as I
noted, most extreme dieters will be doing some type of metabolic work daily (or more
often) trying to strip off that last bit of fat. Where does that leave you?

The seemingly obvious answer is to combine the protocols. If the SFP1.0/2.0 are
appropriate for you, they can be done perhaps twice per week (again, the occasional freak
might do them three times per week but this is the exception, not the rule). On the other
days, do the less intensive protocols. Clear?

In addition to my comments above on general approach, as I detail each protocol, not
only will I tie it in with previous information presented in this book, I'll also try to address
how a given protocol might integrate relatively better or worse with other aspects of your
training or diet.

That is to say, I don’t know what kind of training you are doing or intend to do during
your diet. It might be a body part split where you hit everything heavy once/week. Or it
might be a three-day per week full body ordeal that’s all heavy. Or all metabolic type
work, or some combination of heavy and metabolic work.

Perhaps you're an athlete trying to get rid of the last bit of fat for performance reasons and
your training mandates that you must be doing a certain amount or type of training on a
certain day which limits what you can and can’t do. Since I’m not giving specific
recommendations for the rest of your diet or training, I can only tell you how a given
protocol will or will not work for a given set of situations.

You'll have to make some judgment calls yourself here. When in doubt, err on the side of
conservatism, doing a little bit less for longer usually works better than trying to do too
much and blowing up. If you really can’t figure it out, email me or go to my support forum
at: s

http://forums.lylemcdonald.com
The phantom tingle

Before getting to the protocols themselves, there’s one thing I want to mention first. In
the last chapter, I made this vaguely nonsensical comment about how I ‘felt’ that stubborn

65

[p.70] fat was better targeted the morning following a 5 hour high-carbohydrate reefed and I
want to expand on what I observed.

This may also give you a little bit more of an objective way of determining if the following
protocols are doing anything productive or not. Of course, drops in your skinfolds or
visible fat loss is still the ultimate metric. Just realize that, between issues inherent to
dieting such as water retention, a weird lag in fat loss that often occurs (see the end of this
chapter for more information) and some other issues, skinfolds don’t always drop as
expected; this tends to be especially pronounced in women.

This doesn’t necessarily mean that fat loss isn’t happening, although it can mean that. At
the same time, don’t wait for weeks with no change before changing some aspect of your
training or diet, otherwise folks with a time limit can run out of time if they aren’t careful.

In any case, what I felt on those mornings following a refeed was something I call the
phantom tingle. During various approaches to targeting stubborn body fat, many people
(not all, but many) will note a slight tingling or itching on or under the skin where their
stubborn fat is. So men will get it on their low back or lower abs, women will get it in
their hips or thighs.

Invariably this comes along with the body mobilizing stubborn body fat and appearance
improves and skinfolds drop soon thereafter. This is what I always noticed in a
pronounced fashion the morning after a reefed. I’d take my caffeine and yohimbe and
head to the gym for the treadmill and, without fail, a few minutes in, my low abs would
start itching like crazy. Skinfold drops came quickly thereafter.

I’m not 100% sure what causes this, my guess is that improved blood flow during the
various protocols is causing the itching/tingling effect. Maybe a histamine response of
some sort. I simply don’t know.

All I can tell you is to watch for the effect. Again, not everybody gets it and the absence of
the phantom tingle is not an automatic indication that the protocols aren’t working.
However, if you are getting the phantom tingling during the following protocols, that
almost ensures that what you want to happen is actually happening.

Of whooshes and squishy fat

Before you freak out and think you’ve entered some weird Internet forum where people
talk about stalls and whooshes, please bear with me; there’s actually some physiological
rationale to what I’m going to discuss. “

Many people have noted that fat loss is often discontinuous, that is it often happens in
Stops and starts. So you'll be dieting and dieting and doing everything correctly with
nothing to show for it. Then, boom, almost overnight, you drop 4 pounds and look
leaner.

What's going on? Back during my college days, one of my professors threw out the idea
that after fat cells had been emptied of stored triglyceride, they would temporarily refill

66

[p.71] —T

with water (glycerol attracts water, which might be part of the mechanism). So there
would be no immediate change in size, body weight or appearance. Then, after some time
frame, the water would get dropped, the fat cells would shrink. A weird way of looking at
it might be that the fat loss suddenly becomes ‘apparent’. That is, the fat was emptied and
burned off days or weeks ago but until the water is dropped, nothing appears to have
happened.

For nearly 20 years I looked for research to support this, I was never sure if it was based on
something from the 50's or he just pulled it out of thin air as an explanation. Recently,
one paper did suggest that visceral fat can fill up with water after massive weight loss but
that’s about it.

Somewhat circumstantially, people using bioimpedance body fat scales (which use
hydration to estimate body fat levels) have noted that body fat appears to go up right
before a big drop. This implicates water balance as the issue here.

As well, women, who have more problems with water retention, seem to have bigger issues
with stalls and whooshes than men. Further, some individuals who have done dry carb-
loads (high carbohydrate refeeds without drinking a lot of water) have seen them occur;
presumably the body pulls water into the muscles and out of other tissues (fat cells). In
lean individuals, appearance is often drastically improved with this approach, it doesn’t do
much for those carrying a lot of fat.

I'd note that dry carb-loads suck because you’re so damn thirsty. Interestingly, even
normal refeeds often work in this regards, perhaps the hormonal effect ‘tells’ the body to
chill out and release some water. So not only do refeeds seem to improve stubborn fat
mobilization the next day (as discussed above), they may help the body drop some water
so that you can see what is happening.

Finally, many have reported whooshes following an evening which included alcohol. A
mild diuretic, this would also tend to implicate water balance issues in the whoosh
phenomenon.

I'd also note that this isn’t universal, lean dieters often see visual improvements on a day
to day basis; a lot seems to depend on whether or not they tend to retain water in general.
Folks who do have problems with water retention tend to have stalls and whooshes, those
who don’t show nice consistent visual changes.

On a related topic, I wanted to discuss something else that often happens when people are
getting very lean and dealing with stubborn body fat: the fat gets squishy, feeling almost
like there are small marbles under the skin. Yes, very scientific, I know. That’s the best I
can do.

As folks get very lean, down to the last pounds of fat, the skin and fat cells that are left will
often change appearance and texture. It will look dimply (as the fat cells which are
supporting the skin shrink and the skin isn’t supported) and feel squishy to the touch.
This is bad in that it looks really weird, but it’s good because it means that the fat is going
away. I have nothing truly profound to say about this topic, just realizes that it happens
and usually indicates good things are happening.

67

[p.72] A final introductory topic: Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE)

I’m assuming in this book that you know the difference between weight training, steady
state cardio and interval training. If not, this probably isn’t the right book for you.
However, there’s a concept I’m going to use in Chapter 10 that I can’t be sure that
everyone will be familiar with and it’s faster for me to explain it up front than to keep
repeating myself. Don’t worry, this is the last introductory bit before I finally get to the
protocols themselves.

Most exercise prescription is done using heart rate and there are reasons (good and bad) to
do it that way. But long, long ago, a man named Borg decided to come up with a scale of
rating exercise that didn’t use HR. The Borg scale (or more commonly ‘rating of perceived
exertion’ or RPE) originally ran from 6-20 for reasons J won’t bother explaining. A Borg
rating of 6 was basically rest, 20 was maximal exercise. Studies repeatedly showed that,
once people got used to it, using RPE was just as accurate as using heart rate.

Since people have trouble understanding a scale that doesn’t start at 1, this was later
amended to a 10-point scale. As with the original, 1 is essentially sitting on your couch.
I'd liken a 10 to the time you had to sprint down the airport terminal to make your flight
and thought you were going to die. Most exercise falls between those two extremes.

Under certain circumstances, and this includes three of the four stubborn fat protocols,
heart rate becomes less accurate for rating intensity. Instead, I’m going to give RPE
recommendations for you to use. Towards that end I’ve reproduced the 10-point RPE scale
with descriptions in Table 1 below.

Table 1: RPE vs. Effort

w
las]
fo]

Effort level
Nothing at all
Extremely weak
Very weak
Weak (light)

’ Moderate

n

Strong (heavy)

Very strong

0
0.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1

°o

Extremely strong (maximum)

Typical low intensity steady state cardio would be around a 3-4 RPE. Working at lactate
threshold (the highest intensity you can perform continuously for 20 minutes or so) is a 5-
6 RPE. Longer intervals of 30-60 seconds are typically done at a 7-8 and shorter intervals
of 15-30 seconds) can be up at a 9-10 RPE.

68

[p.73] The Protocols

After the last chapter, I’m sure you’re really ready for me to present the protocols and
we're almost there. I want to reiterate that the four protocols are not being presented in
any order of importance; nor do I want you to think that you need to work through them
sequentially. I am going to start with the ‘simplest’ approach and move towards the most
labor (and effort) intensive as I go.

As you'll see, the protocols are also not meant to be mutually exclusive; that is, you don’t
have to only pick one to perform. Rather, and I'll detail this below, the protocols can (and
often should) be mixed throughout the week. This is especially true for the SFP1.0 and
SFP2.0. This is for the reasons I discussed last chapter (having to do with the potential for
overtraining on a diet) along with more issues I'll discuss here.

For each entry, I'll discuss the protocol itself, explain how it ties in with the information
in the previous chapters, and talk about any other issues such as diet or how to implement
it with your other training.

Protocol 1: Low-carbohydrate diet plus low intensity aerobic activity

So let’s start at the simplest end of things. As discussed last chapter, low-carbohydrate
diets accomplish some nifty things in terms of inhibiting alpha-2 adrenoceptors and
increasing adipose tissue blood flow. Reducing carbs to 20% or less of total calories (so on
1800 calories, 20% is 360 calories or 90 grams per day) will allow the good stuff to happen.

That alone can be coupled with basic steady state cardio which can be done fasted or not.
Ideally, the cardio would be done after consumption of some caffeine (100-200 mg)
consumed 30-60 minutes before to help jack up catecholamine response a bit. Throwing
in a bit of L-tyrosine (1-3 grams) will kick things up a bit too.

As far as duration, 45-60 minutes per session is plenty; if you need to do more than that,
you should split the sessions up. Intensity should be low to moderate, maybe a heart rate
of 130-140. (this is the one protocol where heart rate should be fairly accurate) or an RPE
of 3-4. The old talk test holds here, if you can hold a broken conversation during your
cardio, it should be about the right intensity. It’ll be brisk without being so intense that

69

[p.74] folks start getting anaerobic and either losing muscle or causing other problems with
recovery. It should allow for a decent calorie burn although it won’t be massive. But most
of what’s burned should come from stubborn fat so that’s ok too.

There’s not a whole lot more to say about this approach to stubborn fat loss. Protocol 1
can easily be used daily and will fit safely into just about any training program anybody
could come up with. The exception would be folks who go absolutely nuts with volume;
you shouldn’t need three hours per day of low intensity cardio to get super lean in my
opinion. Protocol 1 fits well with the more advanced protocols as well and can be used on
the days when you can’t do the more advanced stuff.

The biggest drawback of Protocol 1 is that it requires that a very low-carbohydrate diet be
used. Many individuals can’t train effectively on very low carbs. They either feel terrible
mentally, or get depressed (probably from low serotonin), or have a constant headache or
what have you. I’d note that ensuring sufficient mineral intake (sodium, potassium,
magnesium, calcium) can help with fatigue and cramping but sometimes it just isn’t
enough. In which case another protocol should be used.

Of course, performance athletes doing high intensities or volumes of training generally
can’t follow a low-carbohydrate diet (there are exceptions depending on the sport) because
it kills their ability to train effectively. Protocol 1 would be unworkable in that situation.

But for individuals who handle very low-carbs well and/or can’t fit in the more intense
protocols and/or can’t or won't use yohimbine, this approach is plenty workable. The
very low-carb intake will inhibit alpha-2 receptors, the cardio will then mobilize transport
and oxidize the fatty acids. Of course there has to be a reasonable caloric deficit for any fat
loss to occur; don’t think the protocol will magically get it done if you’re eating too much.

Another dietary option worth considering (along with the low-carbohydrate intake),
especially for those women who seem to store thigh fat as their upper bodies lean out, is to
switch out most or all of your standard fat intake for either MCTs or DGs. That’s along
with your daily fish oil intake of course. MCT/DG will be preferentially burned after meals
preventing any odd storage of dietary fat in lower body fat cells.

Protocol 2: Oral yohimbine plus low intensity aerobic activity

As noted above, not everyone can or will follow a low-carbohydrate diet. At the same
time, the higher intensities of the upcoming stubborn fat protocols 1.0 and 2.0 may not be
workable either. They may simply need something to do on the days they aren’t doing
SFP 1.0 or 2.0. .

This brings us to Protocol 2 which is to use oral yohimbine at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg (take
your bodyweight in pounds and divide by 2.2 to get kg, then multiply by 0.2 to get your
yohimbine dose in milligrams). So a 155 Ib. athlete (70kg) would consume 14 mg of
yohimbine per dose. Although many recommend splitting the yohimbine dose
throughout the day, this is not the best way to take it for stubborn fat mobilization; the
entire dose should be taken all at once, ideally with caffeine (100-200 mg depending on
_body weight) 30-60 minutes before low intensity aerobic activity. Again, L-tyrosine (1-3

70

[p.75] grams) could be added as well. With this approach, the yohimbine inhibits the alpha-2
receptors, caffeine and/or tyrosine helps jack up catecholamine output and the low
intensity aerobic activity does the rest.

I’d note that while I’m talking about this approach as if it’s on a carb-based diet, it will also
work fine (if not a bit better) coupled with low-carbs. It’s just that a strict low-
carbohydrate diet isn’t mandatory when oral yohimbine is brought into the equation.

I’d remind readers that even small amounts of insulin shut down yohimbine’s effects
pretty much completely. The yohimbine/caffeine/cardio combination should either be
done fasted first thing in the morning or 3-4 hours after a meal (that should ideally
contain either smaller amounts of carbs, very low glycemic carbs or both).

Similar to the first protocol, Protocol 2 is more or less appropriate for everyone and can be
used daily if needed or desired. Keep in mind that yohimbine does have some stimulant
effects which users should be aware of. Folks who do their cardio at night (either because
they are doing double sessions or that’s the only time they can do it) need to be aware
that caffeine/yohimbine can cause problems with falling asleep. Try to take the
combination at least 4 hours before habitual bedtime and you should be ok.

It would also be best to start with a half-dose of yohimbine for the first few times through
the protocol to asses your tolerance. Recall from a previous chapter that yohimbine can
cause anxiety attacks.in predisposed individuals.

Athletes who can’t indiscriminately add high intensity work to an already high training
load can use Protocol 2 on off days or as an additional low-intensity workout (the aerobic
work should have an active recovery effect to some degree). Of course, readers who choose
to use the SFP 1.0 or 2.0 can use Protocol 2 on the days that they don’t do the higher
intensity protocols to avoid destroying their legs.

The same comments about duration and intensity of exercise from Protocol 1 apply here.
A duration of 45 to 60 minutes at a low to moderate intensity (3-4 RPE) is appropriate. Do
note that yohimbine (especially if combined with caffeine and/or tyrosine) can falsely
elevate heart rate during activity which makes heart rate misleading. Hence my preference
for RPE here. :

Alternately, you can simply work at the aerobic intensity that would have generated a
130-140 HR prior to the yohimbe combination. That is, say that walking at 4mph and 1%
grade normally puts you at a 135 HR. But on yohimbine it takes you to 145-150. You
wouldn’t need to slow down or eliminate the incline to bring HR back down, the
yohimbine is simply giving you a falsely elevated value.

Protocol 3: The original Stubborn Fat Protocol (SFP 1.0)

Some of you may be familiar with the original SFP (now known as SFP1.0 to distinguish it
from the final approach). I want to give credit where credit is due here, much of the idea
for this one came out of involved conversations with a close friend, Elzi Volk. A true nerd

71

[p.76] when it comes to adrenoceptors and yohimbine, she was actually the first female
bodybuilder I prepped, and we used oral yohimbine with steady state cardio and the
Bodyopus diet to get her ready for her show.

This got her fascinated in the topic of stubborn fat, alpha-receptors and much of what I’ve
discussed in this book. You can still find her articles (a bit technical) on the web about
yohimbine and adrenoceptors. In any case, I want to give her credit for helping me to
develop the original SFP 1.0.

The basis of the SFP1.0 comes out of the discussion of exercise from the previous chapter.
Recall from there that high intensity activity (above lactate threshold) can overcome the
lipolytic resistance inherent to stubborn fat cells due to the pronounced hormonal
response.

While wonderful, this is counterbalanced by the fact that high levels of lactic acid in the
blood trap fat in the fat cells and fat is not oxidized well during high intensity activity.
But remember how I mentioned that a few minutes after high intensity activity ceases,
there is a big release of fatty acids into the bloodstream? Maybe you can see where I’m
going with this. By taking a short-break after the intervals and then doing steady state
cardio, we can now burn off the mobilized (and more importantly, released) fatty acids.

The original SFP as outlined was the following. I’ll comment on it further below

The Original Stubborn Fat Protocol (SEP1.0)

1. Done first thing in the morning fasted.

2. 30 minutes’ ‘beforehand: consume 200 mg caffeine, 0.2 malig yohimbine, and 1-3
grams L-tyrosine. NO ephedrine.

3. 5-10 minute-easy warmup. ~ *

‘4; 10 minutes of interval training. This could be anything from 10X30 seconds on/30
seconds off up'to.5X1 minute.on/1 minute off: Ideally this would be done on a
machine that the dieter-doesn’t usually 1 use to increase the catecholamine output.”
These aren’t all out but are done at an’ RPE of perhaps 7-8 so that the workout can
actually be completed anid fatigue isn’t too monstrous.

5. Rest completely for 5 minutes to allow fatty acids to be released into the
bloodstream.

6. Perform 20-40 minutes of aerobic activity, ideally near the lactate ‘threshold as this
is wheré fat oxidation tends to be’ maximized;. ‘in practice most did this ata lower
intensity to ‘spare their legs.

7. Wait an hour to‘eat following the protocol,

Now, some of you may have seen this protocol (in one fashion or another) before. I
originally presented it publicly (I honestly don’t recall where I first posted about it) a
number of years ago after I had first developed it. Since that time, it’s taken on sort of a
life of its own, I know of several online trainers who are using it to prepare their clients.

72

[p.77] Unfortunately, people don’t realize that I have made major modifications to the original
protocol and it’s Still being presented as described above many places. Therefore, I want to
look at it point by point so that you can see how (and more importantly why) I modified
the original protocol in the first place.

Originally the protocol was meant to be done fasted to ensure that insulin was low. Given
that the low intensity warm-up will lower insulin, this turns out not to be necessary.
Many test subjects did the SFP1.0 after having eaten and it worked fine.

The caffeine and yohimbine should be obvious. As mentioned, L-tyrosine is an amino acid
involved in the synthesis of the catecholamines, using it helps to ensure maximal
hormonal response. I disallowed ephedrine as it’s not always a good idea to combine it
with yohimbine; additionally one study showed that ephedrine blunted the adrenaline
response to aerobic activity.

The timing of the yohimbine/caffeine was actually pretty specific. Since yohimbine before
high intensity activity often makes people feel like they are going to die, I was trying to get
the yohimbine into the system shortly after the intervals were done. I’d note that many
test subjects often did the full protocol without any of the supplements, no caffeine, no
yohimbine, no tyrosine. It still worked fine.

The length of the intervals was a subject of some debate. On the one hand, longer
intervals will deplete more glycogen and tend to cause a greater metabolic perturbation.
However, they tend to be hard as hell with a short rest and generate a ton of lactate,
possibly interfering with fat release when the intervals are over.

Some folks experimented with shorter intervals, stuff like 10X15 seconds at near maximum
with a 45 second rest. This seemed to work just as effectively as the same hormonal
response was accomplished without generating too much fatigue or lactate.

Some also used interval style weight training prior to the steady state with seemingly good
results. Studies have shown that weight training can generate a lipolytic response if the
loading parameters are right and some of the high rep/short rest training that is popular
now can probably substitute for formal interval training.

The intensity of the steady state bit was also up to debate. As noted above, fat oxidation is
probably maximized near lactate threshold but this tends to be too high of an intensity for
most dieters. There’s simply too much fatigue, too much high threshold fiber recruitment,
too much potential for muscle loss. So the intensity was scaled back to the 130-140 heart
rate range or a 3-4 RPE.

The final bit about waiting an hour to eat was based on the (very stupid) idea that
maximal fat loss would occur by allowing the body to burn off excess fatty acids with the
post-exercise calorie burn. Essentially, I didn’t want the dieter raising insulin and causing
fatty acid re-esterification. As it turns out, the body keeps burning fat for fuel after high
intensity training even in the presence of insulin so there was no reason to wait to eat. At
the very least dieters should have some protein, but a normal meal was acceptable too.

73

[p.78] I'd note that the SFP1.0, while it might theoretically work better on a low-carb diet seems
to work equally effectively on a carb-based diet. That’s with or without the yohimbine,
caffeine and/or tyrosine. Simply, the high intensity part at the beginning overcomes the
alpha-2 adrenoceptor inhibition of lipolysis, the break gives the fatty acids time to appear
in the bloodstream, and the steady state cardio burns it off.

I'd note that a study came out after I’d developed the original SFP1.0 showing that doing
intervals prior to steady state burned more fatty acids than doing steady state before
intervals. Always nice to be validated, eh?

In any case, after a couple of years of playing with it and getting feedback, the new and
improved SFP1.0 is the following.

The New and Improved Stubborn Fat Protocol 1.0.

“1. Can be done any time of the day. Ideally, ‘the protocol should come 3 or more
hours after a mieal. ~
2. Caffeine (100-200 mg), yohimbine (0.2 mg/kg), tyrosine o 3 grams) 30 minutes
before. All supplements are optional.
3. 5-10 easy warmup.
4. 10 minutes of intervals OR up to 20 minutes of high rep/short rest weight training.
Anywhere from 10X15 seconds hard/45 seconds easy ata perceived exertion
approaching 9-10 during the hard bits (make the easy bits very easy) up to SX1
. minute hard/1- easy:at a perceived. exertion of 7-8 during: the hard bits, Intervals would
ideally be done ona machine you don’t usually use to. maximize the hormonal
response. ;
5. Rest completely for 5 minutes. ° : i viet
6. 20-40 minutes. steady state cardio at an RPE of 3-4. This should be done on the
type of cardio machine you habitually use, as you'll generally be able to burn the-most’
‘calories this way since you can usually perform more work at the same low heart. rate:
7. Can eat immediately afterwards. - :

Notes:

Point 2: I don’t want it to sound like you have to take either all three supplements or none at all. The
protocol will work without them although it will tend to work better with them. You can use any or
all of the suggested supplements depending on preference and what you have available (e.g.
yohimbine is not available everywhere).

Point 4: Intervals are ideally done on an alternative machine to what you normally use but this is
not required. If it’s not possible for some reason or another you can simply use the same machine for
both the interval and steady state bits. As a general comment about doing intervals, unless someone
has been trained to do it properly, I’m generally no fan of running for the interval part. Most people
have horrible running form and heavier athletes often get joint problems. I’d recommend sticking
with a non-impact form of cardio here.

74

[p.79] Additionally, I offered the possibility of using metabolic style weight training (generally
made up of whole body exercises performed for relatively higher repetitions with short rest
periods) in place of the interval portion of the workout; this is because the overall
hormonal and metabolic effect of that kind of training is quite similar to interval training
itself. Studies dating back to the 80’s showed that that kind of training (which was once
popular with elite bodybuilders) mobilizes fatty acids.

If dieters choose to use resistance training rather than intervals, they will probably
generally be doing a slightly greater volume of training, which is why I allowed for twenty
minute of metabolic weight training versus the 10 minutes of intervals. The same basic
work to rest ratios should be kept for the weight training. That is, you could do something
like 15 seconds of a weight training exercise (it would need to be something very full body
of course) with a short rest before doing it again for the total duration. Many individuals
are using a protocol called the Tabata protocol which consists of 8 ‘rounds’ of 20 seconds
hard/10 seconds easy.

While I don't personally advocate Tabata with weights (I am concerned about form
degradation and injuries), it can be done. Alternately, using longer sets, in the 45-60
second range with roughly equal rest would be effective. This might mean 12-15
repetitions (on a fairly controlled cadence) with a 30-60 second rest until the total volume
of training was done. This would still be followed by the five-minute break before
continuing with the steady state cardio to burn off the now mobilized fatty acids.

And that’s the current SFP1.0. As mentioned in my warnings in the previous chapter, the
original protocol sort of took on a life of its own and some people got a little bit crazy with
it, overtraining themselves into the ground. One desperate bodybuilder did the above
twice per day every day for 2 weeks going into his show. He ended up horribly burned out
and overtrained and it was his own damn fault.

Realistically, the SFP 1.0 should only be used twice per week under most situations. And
here I’m assuming that heavy weight training is being done for the legs twice/week.
Someone doing more leg training than this (which would probably be a mistake while
dieting anyhow) would need to cut back the SFP1.0 frequency to once/week. If someone
were willing to cut back their heavy leg training to once/week, they might get away with a
three times per week frequency of performing the SFP1.0. Yes, that means a more
traditional bodypart split but that’s perfectly acceptable when contest dieting.

But a three times per week frequency would be the absolute maximum and, again, the
exception rather than the rule. I’d refer you to last chapter’s warning rather than repeat
myself here.

As one more programming note, I’d comment that most tend to perform heavy leg training
and interval training on different days but this isn’t necessarily ideal. I’ve long advocated
putting interval training on the same day that people train legs. Yes, this makes for one
hell of a hard day. But it gives the legs more total days of recovery per week. So instead of
lifting legs twice/week and performing intervals on two other days/week (which only gives
the legs three rest days); by doubling up the. sessions, the legs are only trained two days
per week heavily (although the individual days are much harder) allowing for five days of
rest per week.

75

[p.80] Ideally, when doubling up, you’d do the two workouts with at least a 4-6 hour break
(realistically most will do it around their work schedule); this isn’t always possible. So
within the context of a diet, you might do the SFP1.0 in the morning (or at lunch) and
then perform weights later in the evening (after work). Yes, weights will probably suffer
but that’s how it goes; life is full of compromises and this is one of them.

If someone can’t train twice daily, there are a couple of options. One is to perform the
SFP1.0 immediately after weights (preferably leg training). If they are performing some
type of high rep/short-rest weight training, that can act as the interval part of the SFP as
mentioned above. If that’s still not doable, it would be best to cut leg-training frequency
and perform the SFP1.0 on the days you’d have normally trained legs. That is, let the SFP
replace a heavy leg day instead of adding to it.

Let me reiterate, the SFP1.0 is intense, it will over train you if you don’t respect it and try
to put it in with too much other leg training, or do it too frequently or what have you. If
it fits into your training (and this is likely not the case for performance athletes who must
do a ton of other specific training), use it sparingly, a couple of times per week and cut
back your other leg training to help with recovery. On the other days, use Protocol 1 or
2.

Have I mentioned that the SFP2.0 is even tougher?

Another warning from your friendly author

In the Jast chapter, I had a whole section of warnings about how trying to do the higher
intensity stubborn fat protocols too often is a recipe for disaster. Without repeating myself
endlessly, I want to really reiterate that point with some warnings specific to the SFP2.0.
Everything I said in the previous chapter applies here, so do my comments on the SFP1.0
above.

Except that they apply that much more to the SFP2.0. I’ve had a number of people test
out the protocol. Some, including the guy on the cover, absolutely thrived on it. Another
coach I know used it with many of his clients, finding that it performed best used
sparingly. They did the protocol roughly 4 times in 2 weeks, any more frequently and
they couldn’t recover.

However, others, including a group coached by a friend who helped me optimize the
original SFP1.0, simply got wrecked by the modified protocol. They could not recover
from it on reduced calories no matter how he adjusted their other training and he went
back to the SFP1.0 coupled with some of the low intensity options on the other days.

What’s the difference? Were the folks who thrived just studs, was my other friend’s group
of trainees just weak? I don’t know. The guy on the cover is a bit of a freak, he can handle
insane training loads and has amazing recovery (he’s also natural, by the way). He was
also very smart in his implementation of the SFP2.0.

First and foremost, he cut his leg training back to once/week as he got further into his diet.
Additionally, if on any given day he was feeling tired, he’d cut back the intensity of the

76

[p.81] intervals a bit, or reduce the steady state part to only 20 minutes. The other tester who
made the protocol work uses a low-volume, bodypart split approach to training his clients.
With only one heavy leg day per week, they were able to do the protocol (still
infrequently) effectively. Honestly, I don’t know why the third coach couldn’t make it
work; I'll only note that his athletes couldn’t handle the full SFP2.0.

The commonality seems to be keeping the overall workload down (and adjusting it based
on the individual’s recovery) to allow for recovery for the absolute assault of the SFP2.0.
While ideal, this tends not to describe the average extreme dieter.

Many, regardless of how they feel, will try to perform every rep of every set that their
training program calls for, even when they feel miserable and exhausted; the spiral into
overtraining is usually not far behind. These folks will take the SFP2.0 protocol as written
and attempt to complete it as often as possible doing every interval, every minute of steady
state, and they won’t cut back their other training. And they'll pay a heavy price as I
talked about before.

Interestingly, with the above said, certain types of performance athletes probably have a
better chance of integrating/surviving the SFP2.0 than the typical hardcore dieter or
physique athlete. That’s simply because certain types of sports could use the basic
structure of the SFP2.0 to get a workout that would be pretty optimized for improving
performance in the first place. That is, even though I’ve aimed it at absolutely maximizing
stubborn fat loss, it has a performance element to it as you’ll soon see.

So those are the warnings that are specific to the SFP2.0, please pay attention to them or
you will pay for it. This protocol is not for everyone and that’s just reality. If you can
handle it, it will outperform anything you’ve ever tried. if not, stick with the other
protocols; you'll still reach your goals.

And now, finally......

Drum roll please.

I’ve explained the physiology, I’ve given the warnings, I’ve done all I can do except for

one thing: It’s taken me 10 years of obsessiveness to get to this point but finally I give you
the SFP 2.0.

Protocol 4: The Stubborn Fat Protocol 2.0

To fully understand how I arrived at the SFP2.0, I need to walk you through the history of
its development. As you'll see, the idea came out of the original SFP1.0.

Back in 2007, I was sitting around thinking about some of the details of the SFP1.0, clearly
it worked and worked well but my OCD brain wasn’t happy.

One thing that bothered me was this, although I have zero data to back it up, I had this

weird hunch that doing the steady state cardio after the intervals would have the effect of
essentially blunting any extra calorie burn from the intervals. Sure, it’s turning out that

77

[p.82] this effect isn’t nearly as large as people think or claim. Realistically, you might burn an
extra 30-50 calories following a typical interval session but when you’re down to the last
pound of fat or two and it’s all stubborn, every gram counts.

Well, the solution to that was pretty damn simple: rather than doing all of the intervals up
front, just split them before and after the steady state cardio. What I didn’t want to do
was to double up the interval volume by adding more intervals after the middle bit, so
splitting the volume up made more sense. Ok, so now we have a protocol consisting of a
warm-up, 5 minutes of short intervals, 5 minute break, 20-40 minutes of steady state
cardio, 5 minutes of additional intervals, short cool down and done. It was ok, but it
wasn’t perfect.

I still had concerns about the optimal interval length to make it do exactly what I wanted
it to do. I wanted to get maximal fatty acid mobilization up front, maximal fat oxidation
during the steady state bout and then any additional benefit from intervals at the end in
terms of afterburn. Ideally without killing the person.

Now there are pros and cons to both longer and shorter intervals. Looking at the
hormonal response I wanted, shorter intervals seemed to fit better up front. You can jack
up the intensity to extremely high levels which really gets adrenaline/noradrenaline
pumping. Even better, shorter intervals accomplish that without exhausting the athlete
(either systemically or just for the low intensity cardio bit that came afterwards). By
avoiding huge lactate spikes, there should be less of an impact on trapping fatty acids in
the fat cell. I had found a study or two showing that shorter intervals had a greater impact
on lipolysis during the exercise bout and did so with less fatigue so that was: pretty
positive. So far so good.

I didn’t see any need to change the break or the steady state bit in the middle since,
outside of playing around with intensity, there wasn’t much to worry about there. As
mentioned in the section above on SFP1.0, it might be ideal to work very close to the
lactate threshold during this part of the protocol for maximal fat oxidation. In practice,
this ends up being too high of an intensity for most people (performance athletes are the
most likely to be able to get away with this). But this section stayed basically the same as
the SFP1.0.

But what about the intervals at the end? Short intervals are nice and all but they don’t
cause the metabolic perturbation or glycogen depletion of longer intervals. I’ve mentioned
that glycogen depletion enhances full body fat burning, it also gives a bigger ‘sink’ for
incoming calories to go to muscle. And even though the afterburn effect is turning out to
be a lot smaller than once thought, when you’re down to the last pound of fat, every bit
counts as ] mentioned above. And longer intervals, due to the greater metabolic effects
will have a bigger impact here. Putting it all together, we end up with the protocol
detailed on the next page. ,

78

[p.83] The Stubborn Fat Protocol 2.0

1.Can be done fasted or not. If not, try to do it at least 3 hours after eating.

2. Can take caffeine (100-200 mg), oral yohimbine (0.2 mg/kg), Ltyrosine (1-3 grams)
30 minutes before hand.

3. 5-10 minute easy warm-up. This will drop insulin if you’ve eaten beforehand.

4. 5 minutes of short intervals. Five repeats of 10-15 seconds at near maximum
intensity (RPE of 9-10), 45-50 seconds recovery done at a very low intensity. Ideally
do this on a machine you don’t usually use. If you have amazing work capacity and
recovery, you can increase this to 10 minutes of.total intervals. . :

5. Rest for 5 minutes.

6. 20-40 minutes of steady state cardio at a low to moderate intensity, 130-140 HR or .
an RPE of about 3-4. This should be done on whatever cardio machine you typically
use since you'll generally be able to burn the most calories for a given heart rate e this ;
way.

7. 5-10 minutes of long intervals. Along the lines of 5X30 seconds on/30 seconds off.
up to a maximum of 5X1 minute on/1 minute off. RPE 7-8 (higher for the shorter
intervals and lower for the longer intervals) and don’t hesitate to cut volume or
duration if your legs are fried. These intervals can be done on the machine of your
choice, it can be the same one you did the steady state cardio on or a different j piece if
you prefer. : :

8. 3-5’ easy cooldown.

9. Feel free to eat a normal diet meal afterwards, at least havea protein shake if you're
not hungry.

Notes:

Point 4: I’m hesitant to even offer the possibility of doing 10 full minutes of intervals at the outset
because I’m afraid that most people will try to use the maximum as the default. Do NOT do this.
When you first try this protocol, if you try this protocol, start with only 5 minutes of short intervals
up front. If you recover ok from it, you can gradually increase this to a total of 10 minutes of 15
seconds at near maximum with 45 seconds very easy for rest.

Point 7: The same comment as for point 4. Folks with amazing work capacity may be able to work
up to a total of 10 minutes of intervals after the steady state portion of the protocol. But everyone
should start with 5 minutes here for the first several times they do the protocol to see how they can
handle it. On any given day, if your legs are trashed, consider cutting back the volume of either the
pre- or post-steady state interval portions.

As a general note on the SFP2.0, the same comment from Point 4 of the SFP1.0 applies to
both interval sections of the SFP2.0: unless you’re trained to sprint, I don’t recommend
running for the intervals (especially the short ones). Pick something non-impact that you
can go hard on without getting hurt.

As mentioned in the SFP1.0, metabolic type weight training could be substituted for either
(or both) of the interval parts of the workout above. For the intervals at the front of the
protocol, you’d want to keep the sets short (and intense) with relatively short rests.
Again, something like the Tabata protocol (8 sets of 20 seconds hard/10 seconds easy)
could be used. For the intervals at the end of the protocol, keep the work sets longer (30-
60 seconds) with relatively longer rest periods (30-60 seconds between sets). Of course,

79

[p.84] there’s nothing that says you have to use weight training both before and after. You
might prefer to use traditional intervals first and metabolic weight training second or the
converse (metabolic weight training first, regular intervals after the steady state portion).

When my first test subject (on the cover) first performed the protocol, he noted not only
the phantom tingle but also a pronounced thermogenic effect for the rest of the day. That
told me I had nailed it with the combination of short intervals up front and long intervals
at the end. He used it during the entirety of his contest prep and his condition at the end
of it speaks volumes. As a natural, he came in leaner and tighter than ever with striated
glutes, winning his pro card.

I've already mentioned that he cut his leg training volume way back, this was the only
way that his legs could handle the metabolic assault of the SFP2.0 without overtraining. I
mentioned issues that other testers ran into above and I'll spare you the rehash here
except to say that you must respect the SFP2.0 and be willing to adjust your training (or
eliminate the protocol completely) as you go.

Assuming that they can handle it at all, the SFP2.0 might be doable by the average dieter
twice per week; it'd be one hell of an individual who could do it three times per week on
non-consecutive days (don't even think about doing it two days in a row) and I’m
tempted to say, in absolute terms, don’t do it.

The same scheduling issues I described for the SFP1.0 apply here. If you absolutely must
train legs heavily twice per week, try do to the SFP2.0 on the same days, your legs will get
more recovery. The other days should be used for either Protocol 1 or 2 above.

Yd note that there’s absolutely no reason you couldn’t do the SFP1.0 once/week, the
SFP2.0 once/week and then uses Protocol 1 or 2 on the other days. Someone who can’t
recover from the SFP2.0 twice/week might very well handle it once/week in conjunction
with the other protocols.

Ideally, if you double up your training, you’d do the SFP2.0 with at least 4-6 hours
between the SFP2.0 and weight training. Since the SFP2.0 is specifically for dieting, I’d
generally say to do the SFP2.0 in the morning and weights in the evening. Your weights
will probably suffer but that’s the price you have to pay. It’s better than systemically
overtraining by hitting legs too hard too frequently on a diet.

Of course, not everybody can or wants to do two workouts per day, or their schedule
won’t allow the ideal break. Some people will be forced to do the SFP2.0 after weights. If
you do the SFP2.0 after leg weights, be very aware of the potential for injury doing
intervals on tired legs. I’d strongly suggest using a mode of exercise for the intervals where
you aren't at risk for turning an ankle or knee from fatigue.

Many also perform some type of high rep or metabolic weight training; as noted above this
can substitute for either the first, second or both interval portions of the SFP2.0. Many
will also perform a bit of heavy work first before doing the metabolic work. So on a leg
day, you might do a low volume of lower-body work (for muscle mass and strength
maintenance) and then move into your metabolic work to start the SFP2.0 (so do
metabolic weight training, rest 5 minutes, steady state, finish off with long intervals).

30

[p.85] As I mentioned above, performance athletes, especially endurance athletes, can probably
use the SFP2.0 effectively as part of their training. Doing short intervals prior to a harder
aerobic section and then finishing off with longer intervals would make a pretty good
performance workout for a variety of reasons outside of the scope of this book.

I’m sure other athletes can come up with some creative way to apply the SFP2.0 to their
sport. Warm-up followed by short sprints, followed by brisk walking, followed by some
high repetition kettlebell work? Nobody has tried it yet but when you do, please send me
an email to tell me how (well) it worked.

And that’s basically that, the SFP2.0 for the world to see. I’d only reiterate that anybody
who decides to use the SFP2.0 must be prepared to cut back their other training and adjust
the protocol as necessary. If you’re exhausted from dieting, save it for another day. If
you’re just not recovering, drop it completely.

As a semi-tangential note, trainees should always be watching out for impending signs of
overtraining such as lethargy, fatigue, lack of motivation, sleep problems, etc. This risk is
even higher on a diet. Just realize that by the time you’ve noticed the signs, it’s usually
too late.

81

[p.86] The End

So that’s it, that’s the solution to stubborn fat. At this point in time, what I put in this
book is the absolute cutting edge in terms of removing stubborn fat on a diet, and I feel
that I can now move onto another project (next up: women and fat loss, why do they
have the problems that they do).

I’ve covered a tremendous amount of information, perhaps too much. I suppose I could
have just put out the protocols without the background but, as people who know me
know, that’s not how I write books. Just saying ‘Do this’ without making you understand
why wouldn’t have made me happy.

At the end of the day, even if you never apply word one from this book to your own
training, you now know more about the topic of body fat (and especially stubborn body
fat) than most anybody out there (except me, of course).

You've learned what body fat is and what purposes it serves in the body. In contrast to the
long held belief that fat is just a passive (and ugly) store of energy, fat is turning out to be
an endocrine organ in its own right. It’s metabolically active, it releases a ton of
hormones, and it communicates with every other tissue in your body including your brain
in order to control various aspects of your physiology.

You learned about the different ‘types’ of body fat as well. Essential fat, brown adipose
tissue, visceral fat, subcutaneous fat and stubborn fat were all detailed. To start
understanding why stubborn fat is stubborn, you had to learn about fat cell metabolism,
how fat cells actually store and mobilize fat for fuel. You also learned the three primary
processes controlling how fat is ‘burned’: the mobilization, transport, and oxidation of
stored body fat.

How hormones impact body fat is a key to understanding. why stubborn fat is stubborn.
Far beyond the simple ‘estrogen is bad’ and ‘testosterone is good’ you saw how myriad
hormones impact on fat cell metabolism. Frankly, this is still an.area ripe for new research.
Seemingly every week a new hormone or factor is found, some turn out to affect fat cells,
others do nothing (or only work in mice and rats).

Finally I addressed the issue of what makes stubborn fat stubborn. You learned about
adrenoceptors, blood flow and how insulin affects different depots of fat. A couple of other

83

[p.87] factors including what types of fat are stored in the cell, cell size, and how global dieting
concerns such as metabolic rate slowdown all affect stubborn fat.

Then I was able to address how the primary factors that are in our control (namely diet,
exercise, and supplements) can impact on fat loss in general and stubborn fat in specific.

All of that was just a lead up to the protocols themselves. Some of you may already have
been familiar with the first three protocols. My new stubborn fat protocol (2.0) is brand
new and has been kept secret outside of the people who tested it for me. It represents the
absolute most cutting edge approach to stripping stubborn fat that I can come up with.

Finally, 10 years after it started, my mind can rest.

Using the approaches outlined in this book, I don’t feel that any dieter should run into
problems with stubborn fat, at least not physiologically. There are other issues that can
stop a diet in its tracks unrelated to stubborn body fat. Hunger, overtraining, just being
tired of feeling like crap; all of these can stop dieters before they reach their goals. But
assuming these can be overcome, the methods in this book should prevent the kinds of
dieting disasters of the ‘My upper body got ripped but I still had fat legs’ kind.

Is this book the final word? For the time being I’d say yes although there are still new
pathways of interest. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) which I talked about in Chapter 6 is
incredibly promising. Figure out how to manipulate that and you can side-step most of the
problems with stubborn fat in the first place. Topical fat reduction creams, such as the
licorice cream I mentioned in Chapter 8 also seem to hold some promise. So far, nothing
seems to have really panned out.

But at this point, other than keeping track of the topic tangentially, I probably won't be
the one to really delve into those issues. I’ve put in my time, I’ve put it all down in this

book, I’m done.

Thank you...and good night.

84

[p.88] References

As I mentioned, this project represents the culmination of nearly 10 years of research and
thinking about the topic, a comprehensive reference list would be impossible. However,
since I know some people will want to follow up on some of the statements I’ve made, I’ve
decided to post an abridged list of what are key references on the topic. By going to one of
the free Pubmed or Medline sources, readers can find the key articles and hit the ‘Related
articles’ tab to turn up as much information as they want on the topic.

I've grouped the references roughly by category and made some comments on each as
necessary.

Adipose tissue blood flow

Astrup A et. al. Skin temperature and subcutaneous adipose tissue blood flow in man.
Scand J Clin Lab Invest (1980) 40: 135-138.

Demonstrated how skin temperature can impact on adipose tissue blood flow.

Bulow J and J Madsen. Influence of blood flow on fatty acid metabolism mobilization from
lipolytically active adipose tissue. Pflug Arch (1981) 390: 169-174.

A study (in dogs) showing the crucial importance of adipose tissue blood flow for optimal
lipolysis.

Bulow J and J Madsen. Adipose tissue blood flow during prolonged heavy exercise. Pflugers
Arch (1976) 363: 231-234.

Showed that 3 hours of continuous activity will drastically increase adipose tissue blood
flow.

Crandall DL et. al. A review of the microcirculation of adipose tissue: anatomic, metabolic,
and angiogenic perspectives. Microcirculation (1997) 4: 211-232.

One of the only two review papers (I have both of course) looking at how adipose tissue
blood flow is regulated.

Engefeldt P. et. al. Subcutaneous adipose tissue blood flow in the abdominal and femoral
regions: effect of fasting. In J Obes (1992) 16: 875- 879.

A paper showing the impact of fasting (which can be mimicked by a low-carbohdyrate
diet) on adipose tissue blood flow.

Galitzky J et. al. Role of vascular alpha-2 adrenoceptors in regulating lipid mobilization
from human adipose tissue. J Clin Invest (1993) 91: 1997-2003.

85

[p.89] A paper showing that alpa-2 adrenceptors are just as involved in blood flow as lipid
metabolism.

Hjemdahl P and BB Fredholm. Influence of adipose tissue blood flow on the lipolytic
response to circulating noradrenaline at normal and reduced pH. Acta PHysiol Scand
(1976) 98: 74-79.

Showed that lowering pH (as might occur with high intensity intervals which generate
acidosis) can impair adipose tissue blood flow.

Wennlund A and B Linde. Influence of hyper- and hypothyroidism on subcutaneous
adipose tissue blood flow in man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1984) 59 258-262.

Examines the impact of thyroid hormone status on adipose tissue blood flow.

Adrenoceptors

Lanfontan M et. al. Alpha-2 adrenoceptors in lipolysis: alpha2 antagonists and lipid-
mobilizing strategies. Am J Clin Nutr (1992) 55: 219s-227s,

An early paper looking at the role of alpha-2 adrenoceptor antagonist (such as yohimbe)
and how they might help with fat loss.

Latontan M Adrenergic regulation of adipocyte metabolism. Hum Reprod. (1997) 12 Suppl
1:6-20.

One of many reviews on adrenoceptors and how they modulate fat cell metabolism.
Mauriege P. et. al. Heterogeneous distribution of beta and alph-2 adrenoceptor binding
sites in numan fat cells from various fat deposits: functional consequences. Eur J Clin

Invest (1987) 17: 156-165.

One of the first papers showing differences in adrenoceptor ratios between different fat
depots. .

Basic fat cell metabolism

Arner P. Human fat cell lipolysis: Biochemistry, regulation and clinical role. Best Pract Res
Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2005) 19:471-82.

A paper that everyone who still wants to use rat/mouse models to develop fat loss
approaches should read since it points out that murine fat cell metabolism is basically

completely different than what goes on in humans.

Bjorntop P. The regulation of adipose tissue distribution in humans. Int J Obes (1996) 20:
291-302.

86

[p.90] Another good review looking at how the distribution of body fat is regulated in humans.

Carmen GY, Victor SM. Signalling mechanisms regulating lipolysis. Cell Signal. 2006
Apr;18(4):401-8.

A detailed look at the mechanisms involved in lipolytic signaling.

Fielding BA and KN Frayn. Lipoprotein lipase and the disposition of dietary fatty acids. Br
J Nutr. (1998) 80:495-502.

An excellent review of the role of LPL in fat cell metabolism.
Frayn KN. Adipose tissue as a buffer for daily lipid flux. Diabetologia. (2002) 45(9):1201-10.

A good paper explaining the crucial role of body fat in storing fatty acids during the day
(after meals).

Friihbeck G. A heliocentric view of leptin. Proc Nutr Soc. (2001) 60(3):301-18.

One of about a zillion reviews on leptin physiology, I remember this one being particularly
good.

Hauner H. Secretory factors from human adipose tissue and their functional role. Proc
Nutr Soc (2005) 64: 163-169.

One of a zillion review papers looking at all of the hormones that fat cells release.
Laaksonen DE et. al. Changes in abdominal subcutaneous fat water content with rapid
weight loss and long-term weight maintenance in abdominally obese men and women. Int

J Obes (2003) 27: 677-683.

One of the few papers examining the issue of how fat cells may refill with water after the
fat has been removed.

Malcolm GT. et. al. Fatty acid composition of adipose tissue in humans: differences
between subcutaneous sites. Am J Clin Nutr (1989) 50: 288-291.

A paper showing that different depots of fat store different fatty acids (i.e. saturated vs.
unsaturated) preferentially.

Raclot T. et. al. Selective release of huma adipocyte fatty acids according to molecular
structure. Biochem J (2997) 324: 911-915. a

A paper showing that different types of fatty acids are easier or harder to mobilize fat from
fat cells.

87

[p.91] Diet

Bach AC et. al. The usefulness of dietary medium-chain triglycerides in body weight
control: fact or fancy? J Lipid Res. 1996 Apr;37(4):708-26.

A good review of the impact of MCTs on fat loss and obesity.

Bisschop PH. et. al. The effect of carbohydrate and fat variation in euenergetic diets on
postabsorptive free fatty acid release. Br J Nutr (2002) 87: 555-559.

A look at how diet affects fatty acid release between meals.

Coppack SW et. al. Nutritional regulation of lipid metabolism in human adipose tissue.
Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes (2001) 109: 202-5214.

A good review of how nutrient intake affects lipid metabolism in fat cells

Gesta S et. al. In vitro and in vivo impairment of alpha2-adrenergic receptor-dependent
antilipolysis by fatty acids in human adipose tissue. Horm Metab Res. (2001) 33(12):701-
7.

The paper showing that 4 days on a low-carb/high-fat diet naturally inhibits alpha-2
adrenoceptors.

Patel JN et. al. Norepinephrine spillover from human adipose tissue before and after a 72-
hour fast. J Clin Endocrinol Metabolism (2002) 87: 3373-3377.

Found that the body increases nervous system output after 3 days of fasting (mimicked by
a low-carbohydrate diet).

Rudkowska I et. al. Diacylglycerol: efficacy and mechanism of action of an anti-obesity
agent. Obes Res. 2005 Nov;13(11):1864-76.

A comprehenive look at the impact of diglycerides (DGs) on metabolism.

Different types of body fat

Ardioluze J-L. et. al. Subcutaneous tissue blood flow varies between superior and inferior
levels of the anterior abdominal wall. Int J Obes (2004) 28: 223-233.

4
Showing that superficial abdominal fat can be subdivided into upper and lower pieces in
terms of blood flow. ,

Monzon JR et. al. Lipolysis in adipocytes isolated from deep and superficial subcutaneous
adipose tissue. Obes Research (2002) 10: 266-269.

A paper looking at the differences in superficial and deep abdominal fat.

88

[p.92] Enevoldsen LH et. al. In vivo human lipolytic activity in perperitoneal and subdivisions of
subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue. Am J Physiol (2001) 281: E110-E114.

A paper showing that deep and superficial abdominal fat are metabolically different with
deep ab fat acting more like visceral fat.

Rebuffe-Scrive M. et. al. Fat cell metabolism in different regions in women. Effect of
menstrual cycle, pregnancy and lactation. J Clin Invest (1985) 75: 1973-1976.

A good review of how fat cell metabolism in different part’s of women’s bodies changes
during different hormonal events.

Exercise and lipolysis

Arner P et. al. Adrenegic reguation of liipolysis in site at rest and during exercise. J Clin
Invest (1990) 85: 893-898.

Showed the adrenoceptor regulation of lipolysis is different at rest and during exercise.

Astorino TA, Is the ventilatory threshold coincident with maximal fat oxidation during
submaximal exercise in women. J Sports Med Phys Fitness (2000) 40: 209-216.

A paper looking at where fat oxidation (in terms of absolute grams) is maximized.

Bell DG et. al. Effects of ingesting caffeine and ephedrine on 10-km run performance. Med
Sci Sports Exerc (2002) 34 344-349.

The paper showing that ephedrine could inhibit the normal adrenaline/epinephrine
response to exercise.

Christmass MA et. al. Effect of work and recovery duration on skeletal muscle oxygenation
and fuel use during sustained intermittent exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol (1999) 80: 436-447.

Showed that shorter intervals had less of a negative impact on lipolysis during exercise
than longer intervals, and that muscle oxygenation stayed higher.

Egan D and T. Head. Energy substrate metabolism during dual work rate exercise: Effects of
order. J Sports Sci (1999) 17: 889-894.

The paper showing that doing intervals before steady state exercise works differently than
the reverse order.

Goto K, et. al. Effects of resistance exercise on lipolysis during subsequent submaximal
exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc. (2007) 39(2):308-15.

Paper showing that resistance exercise can improve lipolysis during aerobic activity done
some time afterwards.

89

[p.93] Horowitz JE Fatty acid mobilization from adipose tissue during exercise. Trends
Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;14(8):386-92.

A good review of the impact of exercise on adipose tissue metabolism, including the impact
of intensity.

LaForgia J et. al. Effects of exercise intensity and duration on the excess post-exercise
oxygen consumption. J Sports Sci. (2006) 24(12):1247-64.

An epic review on the impact of exercise on post-exercise calorie burn, pointing out that
the magnitude of the effect,is much much smaller than many believe or claim.

Price M and P. Moss. The effects of work:rest duration on physiological and perceptual
resonses during intermittent exercise and performance. J Sports Sci (2007) 109. Epub
before print.

Showed that shorter intervals generate less metabolic and perceptual strain than longer
intervals.

Stallknecht B. et al. Are blood flow and lipolysis in subcutaneous adipose tissue influenced
by contractions in adjacent muscles in humans? Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. (2007)
292(2):E394-9.

This is the paper I mentioned in Chapter 1 that everybody took out of context to try to
support spot reduction.

Gender differences

Doucet E. et. al. Reduction of visceral adipose tissue during weight loss. Eur J Clin Nutr
(2002) 56: 297-304.

A paper looking at how visceral fat loss is affected by gender.

Horton TJ et. al. Postprandial leg uptake of triglyceride is greater in woman than men. Am
J Physiol (2002) E1192-E1202.

Another paper showing preferential deposition of calories in women’s legs after a meal.

Jensen MD et. al. Effects of gender on resting leg blood flow: implications for measurement
of regional substrate oxidation. J Appl Physiol (1998) 84: 141-145.

Jensen's lab has done a ton of work on the topic of adipose metabolism between genders.

Hellstrom L et. al. Gender differences in adrenergic regulation of lipid mobilization during
exercise. Int J Sports Med (1996) 17 439-447.

Another good review on gender differences in fat cell metabolism during exercise.

90

[p.94] Power ML and J Shulkin. Sex differences in fat storage, fat metabolism and the health risks
from obesity: possible evolutionary origins. Br J Nutr (2007) 1-10.

A good look at gender differences in fat storage with evolutionary reasons things might
have developed that way.

Romaniski SA et. al. Meal fatty acid uptake in adipose tissue: gender effects in nonobese
humans. Am J Physiol (2000) 279: E455-E462.

A paper showing clear gender differences in how fat is taken up into fat cells after a meal.

Shadid S et. al. Direct free fatty acid uptake into human adipocytes in vivo: relation to
body fat distribution. Diabetes (2007) 56: 1369-1375.

This is the paper showing that fat cells can directly absorb FFA from other cells along with suggestion
that women’s bodies may redistribute fat from one depot to another.

Vortruba SB and MD Jensen. Regional fat deposition as a factor in FFA metabolism. Annu
Rev Nutr (2007) 27 149-164.

A very recent and thorough review looking at how men’s and women’s bodies

differentially regulate fat store and mobilization and how this impacts on regional body fat
distribution.

Hormones and fat cell metabolism:

Anderson LH et. al. the effects of androgens and estrogens on preadipocyte proliferation in
human adipose tissue: influence of gender and site. J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2001) 86:
5045-5051.

Goes part way to explaining how changes in hormones at puberty impacts on the
development of fat cells, their metabolism, and fat deposition patterns.

Cianflone K et. al. Acylation stimulating protein (ASP) an adipocyte autocrine: new
directions. Seminars in Cell Developmental Biology (1999) 10: 31-41.

The paper that everyone still locked into the 20 year old insulin/LPL model of fat storage
should read, detailing the role of ASP in fat cell metabolism and fat storage.

Cianflone K. et. al. Critical review of acylation-stimulating protein physiology in humans
and rodents. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (2003) 127-143.

A good recent review on ASP physiology.

Gravholt CH et. al. Effeects of a physiological GH pulse on interstitial glycerol in
abdominal and femoral adipose tissue. Am J Physiol (277) E848-E854.

Showing that normal GH pulses impact on lipolysis.

91

[p.95] Gravholt CH Physiological levels of glucagon do not influence lipolysis in abdominal
adipose tissue as assessed by microdialysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2001) 86:2085-9.

One of many papers showing that glucagons is not lipolytic in humans. Give it up, guys.

Jensen MD. Cytokine regulation of lipolysis in humans? J Clin Endocrinol Metab. (2003)
88:3003-4

A short review looking at the major hormones impacting on lipolysis.

Lafontan M et. al. Recent development on lipolysis regulation in humans and discovery of
a new lipolytic pathway. Int J Obes (2000) 24: $47-S52.

The first paper I recall that mentioned atrial-natriuretic peptide as a possible non-
adrenoceptor mediator of lipolysis, also a good review of lipolytic regulation in general.

Mayes JS and GH Watson. Direct effects of sex steroid hormones on adipose tissue and
obesity. Obes Rev (2004) 5: 197-216.

An excellent overview of how testosterone, estrogen and progesterone affect body fat.
Meek SE. et. al. Insulin regulaion of free fatty acid metabolism. Diabetes (1999) 48: 10-14.

A paper showing distinct differences between the types of fat and how insulin affects fatty
acid metabolism. :

Ottonson M et. al. Effect of cortisol and growth hormone on lipolysis in human adipose
tissue. J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2000) 85: 799-803.

Title should be self-explanatory.

Pedersen SB et. al. Estrogen controls lipolysis by up-regulating alpha-2A-adrenergic
receptors directly in human adipose tissue through the esrogen receptor alpha.
Implications for the female fat distribution. J Clin Endocrinol Metabolism (2004) 89: 1869-
1878. :

Showed that estrogen could upregulate alpha-2 receptor number rapidly in human fat cells.

Samra JS et. al. Effects of physiological hypercortisolemia on the regulation of lipolysis in
subtaneous adipose tissue. J Clin Endocrinol Metab (1 998) 83: 626-631,

A paper examining the schizophrenic effects of cortisol and how it can either mobilize or
store fat depending on the specifics of what’s going on.

SeckI JR e. al. Glucocorticoids and 1 1beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in adipose tissue
Recent Prog Horm Res. (2004) 59:359-93.

A recent review looking at the impact of 11-beta-HSD and how it impacts on fat cell
metabolism and cortisol ‘reactivation’.

92

[p.96] Topical fat reduction creams

Armanini D et. al.. Glycyrrhetinic acid, the active principle of licorice, can reduce the
thickness of subcutaneous thigh fat through topical application. Steroids. (2005)
70(8):538-42.

The study showing that a topical licorice cream could reduce thigh fat.

Caruso MK et. al. Topical fat reduction from the waist. Diabetes Obes Metab. (2007)
9(3):300-3.

This paper used a topical aminophylline cream for topical fat reduction.
Greenway FL et. al. Topical fat reduction. Obes Res. (1995) 3 Suppl 4:561S-568S.

The study showing that a theophylline cream could reduce fat, it appears that the effect
may have mainly been water loss (theophyilline has mild diuretic effects).

Greenway FL and GA Bray. Regional fat loss from the thigh in obese women after
adrenergic modulation. Clin Ther. (1987) 9:663-9.

Tested a variety of topical creams including yohimbe, forskolin, and others to try to induce
local fat loss.

Tholon L et. al. An in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo demonstration of the lipolytic effect of
slimming liposomes: An unexpected alpha(2)-adrenergic antagonism. J Cosmet Sci. (2002)
53(4):209-18.

The slimming liposomes paper I mentioned, I’m surprised nobody ever brought this to
market.

93

[p.97] Hardcore dieters have no © problem getting certain areas super lean. Shoulders, upper bee
etc. all come in just fine. But most people have those trouble spots. For men it’s usually the _
abdominal and low-back area, women’s lower body fat has been a problem for years. Various
solutions have been proposed over the years, usually based on septs explanations of
what causes the problem. .

The Stubborn Fat Solution represents the culmination of a 10-year obsession I've bad with
the problem of stubborn body fat and how to eliminate it. Presenting four different :
training, nutrition and supplement protocols, it will give dieters all of the tools they need to.
get the stubborn fat off once and for all.
Topics covered include:

_« What body fat actually is and what it does in the body

* An explanation of the different ‘types’ of body fat

| How fat cells store and mobilize body fat

° What it means to ‘burn’ body fat and the key processes involved
* How hormones affect stubborn Body fat
* Why stubborn body fat is stubborn in the first place

. How nutrition, training and supplements impact on stubborn body fa

: ‘The four different poe that. dieters can use to atta stubborn bovy e to get rid of it”
