TITLE: The push to self-optimize is hollowing out your happiness | Brad Stulberg
VIDEO ID: A6dRIGyf-fE
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A6dRIGyf-fE
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-22
DURATION: 20:48
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] I'm Brad Stulberg. I'm author of The Way of Excellence and I'm on faculty at the University of Michigan. >> The barriers to excellence. >> We have this hardwiring to move towards what feels right, to flourish. And what has happened in the modern world is there are all of these temptations, distractions that feel really good in the short term, but leave us wanting and empty and in some cases quite frustrated and that are not concordant with our values in the long term. So, I've identified six barriers to the pursuit of excellence. There's this term disevolution that was coined by the evolutionary scientist Daniel Lieberman. And it essentially says that our modern environment has all of these traps that we didn't evolve for. So, a prime example of disevolution is fast food. So, humans for the longest

[01:02] time lived in scarcity and if a caveman came across a Krispy Kreme, the caveman would eat all the donuts. But now we live in times of abundance, but that hardwiring to crave the donuts hasn't gone away. So, we are disevolved for an environment that has donuts, hence a problem with obesity that is in so many developed countries. Another source of disevolution is confusing social media with genuine community, right? We long, we're a social species, we long for community, we long for connection. And now we are fed connection in these little 10-second bursts of external validation, of likes, of comments, of retweets. So, of course that feels good when we're getting it, but that's nothing like having an actual relationship with another human being. The difference between Pornhub and actually having an intimate relationship with a partner. The former is really easy, there's no friction. It can feel very good, but it doesn't have the fulfillment and the satisfaction of the latter. And when it comes to more conventional ways to think about excellence, I think that there is standing on the sidelines and constantly

[02:04] being an observer of other people doing something and kind of almost feeling good like as a passive observer. I'm getting to watch all these people do all this cool stuff. And that feels good in the moment, but you're not actually stepping into the arena. You're not putting yourself out there. So, the biggest trap is when this hardwiring to feel good gets co-opted by things that feel really good in the short term, but in the long term, they don't align with our values and they often leave leave us feeling worse off. Another trap to excellence is optimization culture. So, it is definitely true that we live in this environment that that often preys on our our hardwiring for um for connection and for satisfaction with these kind of short-term things that feel really good, but as I mentioned that that leave us in the long term wanting. There's a a kind of equal and opposite reaction to this, which is optimization culture, which essentially says, "I'm going to try to control everything about my life.

[03:06] I'm going to try to control not only how long I sleep every night, but how long I'm in REM sleep. I'm going to count and monitor every single calorie that I eat. I'm going to measure literally the space between heartbeats. I'm going to track everything about my life and in doing so, we risk turning ourselves into robots. And as I mentioned, excellence it's it's deeply human. So much of excellence is a felt experience. And if we over optimize our life, then we never get to tap into that felt experience that is so satisfying. Now, to be clear, there is nothing wrong with using devices that help you monitor uh certain things. There's nothing wrong with using a a sleep tracker or a device that helps you count how many steps you're taking. These things can be really integral to behavior change. But when we let these devices control us instead of controlling them, and when we build an entire life around raw optimization, it sucks the feeling out of life, it sucks the humanity out of life, it sucks the joy out of life, and we struggle to have our best performances. The last thing about

[04:07] optimization is it can make us really fragile. So, I want to tell the story of the golfer J.J. Spaun who won the most recent US Open. And the night before he won the US Open, J.J. Spaun's young child was up at 2:00 a.m. vomiting, really sick. And J.J. Spaun was staying in a hotel room with his young child and his wife, and his wife needed to stay home with his kid, so he went to CVS, the only 24-hour drugstore that was open at 3:00 in the morning, and he was up the rest of the night. Now, if J.J. Spaun would have been wearing a recovery device, because he was so concerned with optimizing his performance, it would have told him, "Your recovery score is zero. You didn't sleep. You should stay home." J.J. Spaun won the US Open the next day. So, when we become too focused on all of these optimization tools, it just makes us fragile. We have to think that everything needs to be going a certain way, or everything needs to be perfect, or we always need to feel our best to perform well, but that's utter nonsense.

[05:08] Right? Performance for all that we know about the science of performance, there is so much that we don't know. And when we over-optimize our lives, we shortchange ourselves. We don't give ourselves a chance, and it doesn't account for the messiness of life. Flow is a term that was coined by the psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, and it is the experience of being completely immersed in what you're doing, being totally in the zone. And flow states can be absolutely remarkable. They can be the stuff of meaning in life. If you are in a flow state playing an instrument, or coaching a team, or in a relationship with someone, or uh doing math. Right? These are These are such great experiences. We yearn for these experiences. However, you can also be in a flow state scrolling Twitter. You can be in a flow state gambling. Right? These are other experiences where we lose our sense of self,

[06:08] our perception of time and space becomes warped. They have the hallmarks of flow. Like these things can light you up. They can lead to that sense of aliveness, but it's a pseudo aliveness. It's a kind of aliveness that is not connected with your values. And again, they over the long haul often leads you feeling worse. The psychologist and philosopher David Pizarro coined this term shitty flow to describe these experiences. Where we're in flow, but it's shitty. Like at the end of it, we wish that we weren't in flow. And what Pizarro says is that so often in the modern world, we mistake good genuine flow for shitty flow, and then we wonder why we feel so crappy. So, what separates excellence from flow? One thing that separates excellence from flow, the first big thing that separates excellence from flow, is that flow is values neutral. You can be in flow doing something completely aligned with your values, and it can be wonderful, but you can also be in flow doing something that is very discordant with one's values. The second big difference between excellence and flow is that flow happens

[07:08] in acute moments. Maybe you get into the zone for a couple of seconds, a couple of minutes, a couple of days. If you're lucky, you can enter the slipstream for a week or two. But nobody stays in flow forever. Excellence is so much broader than flow. Excellence includes all of the things that happen before flow, all of the effortful trying, all of the fundamentals, all of the unconscious incompetence and conscious incompetence and conscious competence that leads to a flow state. And then it also includes what happens after the flow state, how we come down from those great experiences. Because there is this inherent risk of becoming addicted to flow and constantly chasing flow and thinking that in order to have a good life, in order to perform well, you always have to be in a flow state. But that's nonsense. It doesn't work like that. By definition, flow states are extraordinary. Excellence is also concerned with what you do on your ordinary days. It's about making your average a little bit better, too. So, good flow is a part of excellence, but it's a small part of excellence. Excellence includes everything that happens before it and after it. And

[08:11] excellence, by definition, cannot be shitty flow because it's got to be in alignment with one's values. So, I think of flow as a small component of excellence and excellence is a much broader concept and broader term to build a life around. A telltale sign of shitty flow is when you come out of the zone, you feel kind of gross. Or you feel anxious. Or you feel regret. So, when you're in the zone rage scrolling on X, you feel really good. Like you just get warped in, right? You get sucked in. And maybe it's not good, but like you're just you're immersed. But when 2 hours has passed and you've just been rage scrolling and you come out of that, you tend to feel restless, impatient, like you need a hot shower, aggravated. If that was in alignment with your values, you wouldn't feel that way. You'd feel satisfied and fulfilled. So, one of the best ways to figure out if you're spending time in shitty flow is to ask yourself not how you feel during the experience, but how you feel after.

[09:11] And if you feel exhausted and like you were just on a bender, it's probably shitty flow. If you feel exhausted but fulfilled and satisfied, it's probably the good kind of flow. There's two kinds of burnout. They're the kind of burnout that most people talk about, which is burning out from working too hard. Doing 90-hour weeks back-to-back-to-back. It doesn't matter what you're doing, eventually you're going to burn out. You're going to suffer from loss of motivation and in fatigue and perhaps injury and illness. But there's another kind of burnout that we don't talk about too much. And it's the term that I coined in the book, zombie burnout. And zombie burnout doesn't come from doing too much, it comes from not doing enough of what lights you up. So you could only be working 30 hours a week, but if you're just kind of going through the motions, if you're a passive observer to life, if you don't really care deeply about anything, you can start to feel all the signs of burnout. You can feel exhausted, you can feel apathetic, you can feel dread, even though you're not working very hard. If your life has no meaningful friction

[10:13] in it, if you don't have to ever overcome challenge, that can zap the feeling out of you. And I called it zombie burnout because it's this kind of numbed out sensation of going through the motions, that on the one hand you're not really working very hard, but on the other hand you're really exhausted. And I think that well, over the last decade there was so much talk about conventional burnout, and conventional burnout is certainly still a problem for some people, I think that a lot of people actually suffer from zombie burnout. Let's take a tale of two people and assume that they're both working 40 hours a week. And one person is pretty into their work. They're focusing intently, they're challenging themselves, and they're they're working in a way that is aligned aligned with their values. The other person working a 40-hour week is just totally going through the motions, right? Doesn't really give a crap about what they're doing. The first person might absolutely flourish and the second person might feel burnout even though they're both working 40 hours a week. So I just think that when we only think

[11:14] about burnout in terms of the quantity of what we're doing, we really miss the boat. We also have to think about the quality of what we're doing. When you have excellence, you're filled with the satisfaction and aliveness and intimacy towards your own life, towards the activities that you're engaged in. And to me, excellence is the ultimate antidote, the pursuit of excellence, the aspiration toward excellence is the ultimate antidote to zombie burnout. Cuz if zombie burnout is just kind of passively going through the motions and smoothing your life over and numbing yourself to death, the pursuit of excellence is pouring yourself into things that align with your values and make you tick. I think that there's a couple of small shifts that can help thwart zombie burnout. The first is in a traditional workplace, if if you work a job, to ask yourself, can you job craft? Can you massage what you're doing day in and day out to be a little bit more aligned with your values, to be a little bit more in touch with the things that you care about? Cuz sometimes we just have boring jobs, right? And we work to pay the bills, we're not passionate about our work, and

[12:15] we we we fill out spreadsheets all day, whatever it might be, but we make good money and we go home. In in those instances, I still think generally there are a couple small levers that one can pull to bring a little bit more engagement and a little bit more interest into their work. However, a lot of people say, "You know, Brad, you're very fortunate. You you get to pursue this craft, you're a writer. I just work to pay the bills, I want to send my kids to school, I want to pay my mortgage." And to that person, what I would say is, "Well, what are you doing in your leisure time?" And if your leisure time is very passive, if it's passive consumption, and if it's not active, if you're not stepping into the arena, if you're not challenging yourself, then I would say that actually what's going to make you feel less exhausted is trying harder and exerting effort towards things that you find meaningful. So, replacing the passive consumption of mind-numbing television with reading a book, a lot more active, a lot more engaging. Even better, train for a marathon, learn an instrument, go garden. In my own life, I pursue excellence in in three primary domains.

[13:15] The first is as a husband and a father. The second is as a craftsperson, and in my craft is as a writer. And then the third is in my leisure time in in in a a which for me is powerlifting and particular the deadlift, which is just lifting a bunch of weight from the ground up to your waist. It's a very simple movement. And I got into deadlifting about 7 years ago because I love the objectivity and the concrete nature of it. Right, writing can be very subjective. Whether or not someone likes a book is completely outside of my control. It depends on what's going on in their own life and in their own mind. But a deadlift, it's just lifting weight. And like the bar doesn't lie. You either get better or you don't. So, the the the the tangibility of it and the feedback loop is is is really uh satisfying for me. Now, you might be thinking that spending all this time just lifting weight from the ground to your hips is kind of futile and meaningless. But as I stated earlier, the goals that we work on also work on us. So, I'm never going to win anything in deadlifting. I'm not that good. However,

[14:16] what deadlifting does for me is it teaches me about doing hard things, about embracing discomfort, about vulnerability, about failure, about commitment, about discipline, about patience, about consistency, about the power of coaching and mentorship and community, and showing up, and all of these other things that don't just make me a better deadlifter, but make me a better person. There's a a misconception that excellence can only happen in one's career, but you can aspire toward excellence and get all the benefits in hobbies and leisure time. And in some ways it's actually easier because you have full agency. I think zombie burnout happens when you have this perfect mix of a job that you don't really care about and you're going through the motions, and then leisure time where you're just kind of floating through life with a a passivity. Another barrier to excellence is what I call the happiness industrial complex. And the happiness industrial complex says that the whole point of life is to be happy. And that we should just chase happiness.

[15:16] However, happiness is just like any other emotion. It comes in goes. And happiness is never the result of aiming for happiness. It's always a byproduct of doing something else. And I think that sometimes what happens is when we think that we should always be happy all the time, we put all this pressure on ourselves and we judge ourselves when we're not happy. But the truth is life is full of discomfort, of challenge, of suffering, of heartbreak. And in my last decade plus of reporting, individuals who really live good lives, who flourish, they experience happiness, but they don't chase happiness. What they chase is satisfaction, meaning, and fulfillment. In my own life, the things that make me feel most alive, most situated in the world, when I'm writing, when I'm in the gym deadlifting, when I'm coaching my son's basketball games. If you were to ask me in those moments, am I happy? The answer would undoubtedly be no. When I'm working hard on a manuscript, I wouldn't say that I am happy.

[16:17] When I'm on the sideline coaching my kid, I'm not happy. I'm engaged. When I'm in the gym deadlifting, I'm often very uncomfortable. But what I am in all of those instances is I am deeply satisfied and fulfilled. And I think that it behooves us to not put happiness on a pedestal, to not chase happiness, and instead to try to orient around what I call excellence, which then leads to mastery and mattering and satisfaction and fulfillment. And satisfaction and happiness are very different things. Happiness has this hedonic tone to it that is very ephemeral. Whereas satisfaction it's deeper, like we feel it in our bones, it's more lasting. And don't get me wrong, satisfaction, like a life of satisfaction, is going to have moments of great, great happiness, but it's like a butterfly, the more you try to grab happiness, the more it's going to flow away from you. And there's a a wonderful uh very very popular hypothetical that's often used in undergraduate philosophy classes to make the point that I'm making about happiness. And I'll give it to you you

[17:17] real quick. Imagine if you had two options. And in the first option, someone will put you in a tube for the rest of your life. So, they take you away from your friends, they take you away from your family, they take you away from any hardship that you have, any suffering, and they put you in a tube. But, here's the catch. They would give you two drugs. The first drug would make you forget that you're in a tube. And the second drug would make you feel euphoric for the rest of your life. Or, you could choose not to go in the tube and just go on living your life. And the vast majority of people choose not to go in the tube. So, the tube is like a happiness machine. You're just happy all the time, right? But, you would leave behind all the stuff of fulfillment, of meaning. And that is really what makes for a good flourishing human life. And if you step back and you think about the tube, you know what the tube starts to sound quite a bit like? Like a heroin addiction. Right? I mean, it shrinks your life. And

[18:20] And And And those are very serious issues that that that that lives and they and they blow up communities and families. But, someone in the throws of heroin, when they're actually using, like they get a rush of euphoria. So, I just think there are so many examples that that that show us that while happiness is great, if we make happiness the thing, it can often backfire. Um and as I said, I call it the happiness industrial complex. There's all these books about how to be happy. But, the best way to be happy is to stop trying so damn hard to be happy and to throw yourself and care deeply about things that matter. And when you're having good days, enjoy them. And when you're having bad days or you're feeling pain, realize that that too is a part of the human existence. Another trap or misconception about excellence is that it's a standard. So, it means making it to the Olympics or becoming the first chair violinist or graduating from medical school or getting straight A's, or playing Division 1 sports. Those outcomes, they're wonderful and we should want to attain them. However,

[19:20] they are a very small part of excellence. They are the peak of the mountain. But the truth is that you spend 99.99999% of your time on the sides of the mountain. And that is where so much of life is lived and that's where so much of excellence unfolds. I also quote Robert Pirsig in the book um and I just I love this so much and I think it it really encapsulates this point. And Pirsig says that the only Zen you find on the tops of mountains is the Zen that you bring up there with you. We think that all the Zen, all the good stuff, is what we get on the summit of the mountain when we achieve our goal. But actually, the only good stuff that's going to be on the top of the mountain when we achieve the goal is the experience that we have to get there. And that's very true as an actual mountain climber, but that's also true metaphorically in whatever goal we pursue. If we pursue a goal of starting a company, but we're miserable the whole time we do it, we're angry, we're resentful, we're not building relationships, we're not living in alignment with our values, when that IPO bell rings, we're still going to be an empty miserable person. There's going to

[20:20] be no Zen on the top of that mountain. But if we pursue the goal of starting a company, of having a company IPO, in a way that aligns with our values, that shapes our character, that builds relationships, where actually having fun, then when we ring that bell, it's going to be a really joyful experience. >> Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
