TITLE: Getting 1% better every day is mathematically impossible. Do this instead | Brad Stulberg
VIDEO ID: RcJbUrsb6_c
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RcJbUrsb6_c
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-04-23
DURATION: 18:29
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] I'm Brad Stulberg. I'm author of The Way of Excellence and I'm on faculty at the University of Michigan. Three key factors in the pursuit of excellence. While there are 16 factors of excellence, for the purposes of today, let's go into three. Goals, consistency, and patience. Goals give you a target to shoot for. It's important to pick a mountain to climb. And without a peak, there is no mountain. And a goal is very much that you're striving for. So, it gives your journey, it gives your pursuit some shape and some form. A process over outcomes mindset says that first you do, you want to pick your big aspirational goal. And then after you set that big goal, you want to break it down into its smaller component parts. Because just thinking about this big goal can often be overwhelming. But if you can break it down into small parts, it gives you these manageable micro milestones along the way. Then the third step of a process mindset is to largely forget about the big goal.

[01:02] And instead, focus on those small daily, sometimes weekly steps that you can take to work toward that big goal. Now, the fourth part is if you catch yourself stressing out or worrying about the big goal ahead of you, use that as a cue to ask yourself, what could you be doing right now? How can you re-immerse yourself in the process? And fifth and finally, remember that occasionally, inevitably, you are going to fall off the path. When you fall off the path, your job is simply to step back on. A process over outcomes mindset is so important because when we set a big goal, there's often this temptation to talk about the goal, to think about the goal, to dream about the goal, but these things all become stand-ins for actually working toward the goal. And the only way that we accomplish really big goals is by focusing on the small steps that we take along the way. Often times we think that the achievement of some goal is what's going to bring us fulfillment. But it's it's actually not the achievement, it's all the work that we do to get to the goal. That's where

[02:02] the joy and the satisfaction lives. Don't get me wrong, achievement feels good. As I said earlier, excellence is not a let's all hold hands and sing Kumbaya and pretend that winning or accomplishment doesn't matter. But it also acknowledges that if we if we tell ourselves, if I just win this or if I just accomplish that, then I'll be happy, we are falling for a trap that is is old as time. In the book, I tell the story of Ray Allen, one of the best basketball players ever, a craftsperson, phenomenal technician, three-point shooter. And Ray Allen had done everything in his career except win a championship. He had been in All-Star games. He had won three-point shooting titles. He even starred in a Spike Lee movie, He Got Game. But Ray thought that if he just won a championship, then the hole inside would be filled, then he'd be content. And finally, after years of trying, he won his first championship with the Boston Celtics in 2008. And you know what Ray Allen said? He said the morning after winning that championship was one of the most disorienting mornings of his life because he realized that it didn't fulfill him. Now, if that is not a perfect

[03:03] encapsulation of this trap, of this arrival fallacy, I don't know what is. But we all feel that, right? My guess is every single individual watching this is at some point in their life told themselves a story that if they just get to this achievement, then they'll be happy or then they'll be content. And perhaps you had contentment and happiness for a couple hours or a couple days or maybe even a couple weeks, but then you're back to striving. In in running, it's called the post-marathon blues. So, you train so hard for this big goal, you run a marathon, you achieve it, and then the next day you're sad. Why? Because you built up achievement as if it was going to be this thing that would give you lasting satisfaction when you were actually more satisfied in the training because that's the work that you were doing day in and day out. If you are new to a craft or new to an activity or maybe you're even new to setting goals to begin with, a really advantageous and helpful framework is called SMART. And it stands for specific, measurable, actionable, relatable,

[04:03] and time-bound. So, an example of a SMART goal could be deadlifting 405 lb. So, it's very specific, right? It's a deadlift. It's very measurable, there's a number, I want to get to 405 lb. It's very actionable, you can back into a training plan that you can show up and and try to engage in and do every single day. It's very relatable if you value health or you value performance or you're in the gym. And then finally, it's time-bound. You could say, I want to deadlift 405 lb by the end of this year. That would be an example of a SMART goal. SMART goals are really useful because they hold you accountable. They're not wishy-washy. They give you a specific time frame to work toward that goal in. And again, they're very actionable. You can say to deadlift 405 lb, these are the the the the four workouts I need to do every single week for 4 years that is going to help me achieve that eventual goal down the road. So, as this comes together, you can see that when we pursue a goal, we're working toward that goal, but that goal

[05:03] is also working on us. We want to get to the peak of the mountain, but all the growth happens on the side. So, the peak of the mountain might be a 600-lb deadlift. But we are growing as a person. We are learning about resilience and overcoming failure and being uncomfortable and the power of community and vulnerability and failure and showing up. That doesn't happen when we hit the 600-lb lift. That happens in the years of training to get there. So, if we're pursuing our goals in a way that aligns with our values, we have this beautiful closed loop where the process is energizing, it's satisfying, it's fulfilling, it's shaping us as a person. And if we achieve the goal, if we get to the top of the mountain, we'll have brought a lot of zen, a lot of aliveness, a lot of satisfaction up there with us. Log on to the internet, any social media, and there are so many influencers that just are showing their absolute heroic days. So, it's the workout that leaves you shredded and you you go till you puke. It's the tech bro that is bragging about the string of all-nighters that he or she pulled to to

[06:05] launch their company. The runner that talks about that epic workout where they did 16 400s at 5K pace, whatever it is. And what can happen is we can mistake the goal of excellence as having these single heroic days. When in fact, the way that you make progress at something, the goal of excellence is not to have a heroic day, it's to string together many very good days over a long periods of time to create a heroic year or a heroic decade or heroic body of work. If I wanted to be the best writer, the most proficient writer I could be over a one-week period, I would not sleep and I would exist on a diet of Red Bull, Celsius, espresso, and cigarettes. And truly, I think if I did that for 1 week, I would produce an enormous volume of very high-quality work. That would be a heroic week. But if I tried to build a career writing like that, my writing would go to crap. And that is the trap of optimizing for short-term intensity,

[07:05] for what plays really well, for what makes us feel heroic versus long-term progress, which is much more a function of consistency. It's not to say that there aren't times to be intense. It's not to say that there aren't times to go to the well. There absolutely are. One of my friends and collaborative partner, Steve Magnus, calls this going to see God. There are times in every pursuit where we want to go see God, but the only way that we give ourselves the fitness, the ability to have that intensity is by being super consistent. We have to build up to those moments when we go see God, and even then, we can only go see God a few times a year at most. There's this popular framework in personal development and and in performance that is just get 1% better every day. And as a mindset, I really agree with it and I like it. What it says is that you don't always have to hit home runs. You just have to put the ball in play. Right? You don't have to be a hero. Just show up every day and just get a little bit better. Just get 1% better every day. And as a mindset, that is a wonderful driver of consistency.

[08:05] However, what often happens is that people start to take that a little bit too literally and they expect that they'll actually get 1% better every day. But progress doesn't work like that. If I got 1% better every day as a powerlifter, my deadlift would be over 1,000 lb right now. I'd be the best deadlifter to ever live. It's not. If I got 1% better every day as a writer, I would have nine Pulitzer Prizes by now. But I don't. So, how progress actually works is when we're relatively new to something, we get more than 1% better every day. We get 100% better every day. Then we get 70% better, 50% better, 20% better, 10% better. And then we get to this phase where we're making these little incremental gains. We're getting 1% better every day. And that sense of concrete progress is so addictive. It's so motivating. But what happens to anyone on a journey of progress is that eventually they hit a plateau and they stop getting 1% better every day. And at this point, the motivation has got to shift from these observable, concrete bits of progress to curiosity about what

[09:09] you're doing and to commitment and to an unwavering consistency that acknowledges that sometimes you are going to get a little bit better, but sometimes, for a week, for a month, maybe even a year, you might be on a plateau where you don't yet see observable progress, but if you keep showing up, underneath the surface, you're building experience, you're building progress. To bring this point to life in the book, I tell the story of the world champion powerlifter, Layne Norton. And Layne Norton deadlifted 723 lb. So, for his age and weight class, the best in the world. Guess what Layne Norton deadlifted 10 years prior. 715 lb. So, over 10 years, Layne Norton added 8 lb to his deadlift. So, he wasn't getting 1% better every day. He wasn't even getting 1% better every year. He was getting about 0.8% better every year. Now, if you divide 0.8% by 365, I would need someone that's better at math to tell me, but there would be a decimal

[10:09] and a few zeros. So, if Lane Norton was addicted to that kind of progress, if Lane Norton said, "I just need to get 1% better every day." he would have quit. He worked 10 years to gain less than a percentage point of performance. And I asked Lane, I said, "What kept you on the path?" And he said, "It was curiosity about the craft. It was self-discovery. It was community. It was commitment. It was discipline. And it was this mindset that whether or not I made observable progress, I would stay consistent." There's a lot of fascinating research that that comes out of sports science is the main field that shows that when athletes increase their acute training load, which is often defined as what you do this week, by more than 10% of their chronic training load, which is often defined as what you've done the past month, rates of injury and illness skyrocket. So, what that means is that if you try to take too big of a jump from your historic body of work, from what you've been doing, you set yourself up to get

[11:09] injured, to burn out. So, while that is very measurable in sport, in my reporting, I saw this in just about every field. That when we go on these benders of just trying to do an enormous amount of work, when we get caught up in hustle culture, and we try to be hero of the day or hero of the week, we have a really good day or a really good week, but then the following month or two months, or in some cases year, goes to crap. And then you end up on this performance trajectory where you have a couple great days, but in between those great days are shitty months. And that's not how lasting progress is made. You don't go to the gym and kill yourself once a week to gain muscle and to gain fitness. You got to go to the gym 4 days a week. In order to go to the gym 4 days a week, you can't kill yourself on any one because the goal isn't to destroy yourself, the goal is to build a consistent rhythm that allows you to incrementally gain over time. If you're interested in establishing consistency for yourself toward a goal, here here a couple ideas that can help. You generally want to stop one rep

[12:10] short, or one sentence short, or one meeting short. So, very rarely do you just want to leave it all out there on any given day. You want to have a little bit in the tank so that you can pick up that rhythm the next day. Another way to think about it is you want most efforts to be somewhere between a five and a seven out of 10. Cuz once you start tapping into that eight, nine, 10 out of 10, you're drawing from the bank that you're going to need for the rest of the week or the rest of the month. If you go below a five out of 10, you can kind of get into that easy going through the motions, you're not really challenging yourself zone. But a five to seven out of 10, a just manageable challenge, that is like the proximate zone of consistency, the proximate zone of development. And then the final thing I'd say is be an be an anthropologist of your own progress. So, look back at the times that you overshot the target. And what led you to do that? Was it a lack of confidence? Was it insecurity? Was it comparing yourself to what other people do? And how can you try to short circuit that temptation in the future? Patience means understanding that

[13:11] there's no such thing as an overnight breakthrough. Every great accomplishment, every great attainment, every great achievement in science, in the arts, in sports, in business, it was always years in the making. So, we've got to play the long game. We have to commit to showing up through those ups and downs, in turns, in setbacks, in highs, in lows. Um and and we've got to zoom out and really give ourselves a chance to stay on the path over a long period of time and not rush our progress. Because when we rush our progress, we get in our own way. That's when we get injured, when we burn out. I think it's a very natural human inclination to want to rush. And I think that it's perpetuated by the modern world, which is very high velocity. Like everything moves fast. The news cycle moves fast. Entertainment moves fast. Our cars move fast. We communicate in microseconds with the click of a button. There's so much velocity in life. But the path of excellence, of making progress in a heartfelt pursuit, it's often a nine-inning game. It takes

[14:12] time. And you can't rush your way through a nine-inning game. And as badly as you might want to be in the bottom of the seventh, it could just be that you're in the top of the third. When thinking about patience is a integral factor of excellence, it's really important to understand and expect plateaus. Plateaus are a feature because they're what happens when you stop getting 1% better every day. And in many ways, when you're on the plateau, that's when all the interesting stuff happens, when you can't predict progress, when it becomes non-linear, when you really have to lean into discipline, and you have to practice your values and find the rewards intrinsically because you're not getting that external validation and that external little dopamine hit of progress. Plateaus are also a feature because generally speaking, before we have a breakthrough, we experience a plateau. So, it's like pounding a stone. And the stone might crack on the 32nd pound, but the first 31 pounds, you're building tension. And even though you're not seeing the

[15:12] stone crack, tension is building in the stone. And when we work on goals, we're going to get to a point when we need to build that tension, when we're going to be on this plateau. And if we stick to our process, if we stay consistent, we give ourselves the best chance at eventually having the breakthrough. Micro objectives are so important in the pursuit of big goals because they keep you really present. So, let's use the metaphor of a mountain again. If you're constantly looking at the peak of the mountain at the start of your climb, you might get really discouraged cuz it's quite far away. You might also trip and fall because you're not looking down, you're not climbing where your feet are. But if instead of looking at the peak of the mountain, you say, "My goal for today is to gain 200 m, 300 m, whatever it might be in elevation." Then instead of having to look all the way up at the peak of the mountain and be overwhelmed and potentially trip, you can just look up at the next section. And that is such a powerful focusing mechanism to keep you climbing where your feet are. And this is true on an

[16:13] actual mountain, but it's also true metaphorically. The other reason that micro objectives are really important is because they serve as a motivating force. Right? If you view the mountain as just getting to the peak, and the peak might take 4 months, it's really hard to sustain motivation. But if you give yourself some contrived little victories along the way, some milestones, you can feel that that progress being made in in in route to the bigger goal. A profound example of this that that's not a mountain climber, but another athlete, comes from the bobsledder Kaillie Humphries. Kaillie Humphries is a three-time gold medalist and a five-time world champion. She's competed in five Olympics. So, you can do the math. She's been at top of this sport for 20 years. Just incredible longevity. And I asked Kaillie, I said, "Kaillie, tell me about your goals." And she said, "My goal is really simple. My goal is to win a gold medal every 4 years." And I joked, I said, "Simple simple doesn't mean easy." And then she said, "Here's how I go about this goal. I break that big goal of win a gold

[17:14] medal every 4 years down into two by two years. And the first two years is about building a base, and the second two years is about sharpening the edge of the sword. And then each of those two-year increments gets broken down into 1 year. And each year has a specific training focus, a specific training objective. Each year gets broken down into quarters. Each quarter gets broken down into months. Each month gets broken down into weeks. And each week gets broken down into days. And every day, I just have to show up and execute my workout. That to me is this wonderful example of a process over outcome mindset that embraces the power of consistency and that requires a lot of patience. So, there is this really nice interplay between setting goals, which again gives your path, gives your activity some form, committing to consistency, which is what keeps you working toward your goal, and then having an attitude of patience, which is what allows you to play the long game, to give your consistency a chance to manifest into progress.

[18:21] Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early, ad-free.
