TITLE: Why Stoicism fails when treated like self-help | Massimo Pigliucci
VIDEO ID: V3_EAZd0-rw
URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V3_EAZd0-rw
UPLOAD DATE: 2026-01-06
DURATION: 22:30
CAPTION TRACK: en-orig
======================================================================

[00:00] The psychics are nothing if not realists about life. They accept the world the way it actually is, not the way you would want it to be. The problem is, of course, that life sometimes it's complicated. There are multiple choices. We have a tendency to want to simplify things and go for something that is stark, that it's clear, that it's obvious. That's just not the way the world works. And according to the Stoics, it's much better to try to understand how the world works and then act accordingly rather than trying to impose on the world the way we want to think or the way we preferred things to be. I am Masimo Piluchi. I am an evolutionary biologist and a philosopher of science and my latest book is called Beyond Stoicism co-authored with Greg Lopez and Meredith Kun. What is stoicism? Stoicism is a philosophy of life that suggests that the best way to live a human life is to ask yourself what kind

[01:01] of a living organism human beings are. And the answer that the Stoics give to that question is that fundamentally we are highly social and capable of reason. We're very intelligent. It follows according to them that a good human life is one where you use reason in order to solve problems and you behave in a cooperative pro-social fashion. One of the crucial insights of the Stoics is that we should focus on what is up to us as the ancient stoic Epictitus put it and try to accept with equinimity what is not up to us. In other words, focus where your agency is active, where you are efficacious in doing things and then accept whatever comes as it comes because you really don't have a choice. The sites are nothing if not realists about life. Uh they try to understand how human life works and they try to live the best life possible. One of the things that we do understand from

[02:02] biology, psychology is that we have limited time and energy to do things, both physical energy and emotional energy. And so if we insist on pursuing approaches that are likely not to work or they're not efficacious, they're not, you know, our agency doesn't really have any effect on it, then we are only making our life miserable. And in fact we're trading off with other things that we should be doing. Uh one of the interesting aspects of the particular brand of stoicism so to speak that Epictitus articulated in the second century is this notion of role ethics. We all play different roles in life many roles in fact. And if we if we reflect on it for a minute, for instance, um some of my roles include being somebody's son, uh being somebody's father, being somebody's husband, being a friend, being a teacher, being a colleague, being a citizen of a particular nation, uh and of a particular city and so on and so

[03:03] forth. All of these roles need to be handled essentially simultaneously. It's not like I I can decide one day I'm going to be just a colleague and nothing else. I am a colleague perhaps in this particular moment when I'm at work and I'm interacting with other people but I'm at the same time also a husband a father a friend etc etc and the idea here is that I need to conserve my both physical and emotional mental energy so that I can do my best in all of these roles uh whenever it is that I need to do something about it if I'm going to waste a lot of energy and time on a particular thing especially that something that is for which my efforts are in fact not efficacious then I'm really trading off with everything else I am getting depressed let's say by just constantly reading the news uh about things that are not actionable about things that I cannot do anything about well the result of that is then I'm not useful to my family I'm not useful to my

[04:04] friends I'm not in fact useful to society in general and even to myself so it's about conserving energy setting priorities. This goes back to the the first discipline of epitus, the discipline of desire, setting goals. Depending on our values, we set goals and we set priorities. And doing so is crucial because otherwise we end up wasting a lot of time and then regretting it. And usually it when you get to the point of regret, especially near the end of your life, it's a little too late. Senica points out in one of his letters to his friend Lucilius that too many people start reflecting on what they want to do and why near the end of their lives when it's too late when when they already done most of what they were going to do. Stoicism is one of the Greco Roman philosophies that evolved during the elenistic period and the goal is to live a udemonic life. Udeia is a word that in Greek means roughly speaking a life worth living. the kind

[05:04] of life that you get to the end of it and you say, "Yeah, that was not wasted time." Now, different elenistic schools like the Epicurans for instance or the skeptics had different answers to what constitutes a udemonic life. According to the Stoics, living a udemonic life means living intelligently, smartly and socially. Because one of the fundamental aspects of stoicism is that we should live a pro-social life. That is a life where we interact with other people because we are naturally a social organism. Uh then the Stoics put a lot of emphasis on relationships with people on on our roles in society. What is it that is a good thing or not thing to do uh with respect to other people. In fact they went so far as declaring themselves cosmopolitan. Being a cosmopolitan means being a member of the human cosmopololis, the human city, the universal human city. According to the Stoics, every human being on earth is our brother and sister and we should treat them accordingly. The ancient

[06:05] stoic Epictitus who lived at the beginning of the second century laid out three fundamental disciplines for the study and practice of stoicism. They referred to normally as the discipline of desire, the discipline of action, and the discipline of ascent. Although I should warn you that the English terms are a little bit misleading compared to the original Greek. Desire for instance doesn't mean whatever I fancy at the moment. It means my values and also my dis values. That is the kinds of things that I think are important and good in life and the kind of things that are not important or bad in life. The discipline of desire teaches us to re-evaluate critically our values to reorient ourselves according to good values to make deliberate decisions about what those values are and why. The second discipline the discipline of action has to do as the name implies with acting toward other

[07:06] people. We live in a society. We don't just We enact those values every time that we do something or say something. especially to other people. So the discipline of action is about putting into practice our values when we interact in society at large with other human beings. Finally, the discipline of ascent. Ascent means of course agreement. But for Epictitus that means thinking carefully and rationally about the other two disciplines about values and how to implement them. So the discipline of ascent in a sense is about making all of this flow so nicely and so smoothly that we have in fact according to the stoics a smooth or a smoothly flowing life. The three disciplines are a way to implement stoicism in practice but stoicism of course is a philosophy. So there is also a theory behind it. And in order to understand the story theory, we need to

[08:07] refer to the three areas of study that were typical in any stoic curriculum. If you went to a stoic school, let's say the school that was run by Epictitus in northwestern Greece in the second century, you would actually study before you get to the disciplines and how to live your life, you would study the three general areas that are pertinent to those disciplines. Now there are two the English names are a little bit misleading. They are physics, ethics and logic. But what they mean exactly is something a little bit different uh from modern English. And so we need to be careful here. Physics for instance comes from phys which means nature. So when I say physics don't think quantum mechanics or general relativity or things like that. Uh think science in general. So a a good understanding of how the world works that's connected to the discipline of desire. That is to the discipline that deals with our goals and priorities in life. Why? Because our

[09:07] goals and priorities in life depend on what kind of living organism we are. If we if we were a different kind, you know, a martian or a dog or a lion, we would have different priorities. So it's about understanding the world as it works. And the best way to understand the world as it is is through science. So you study science in order to investigate into your own goals and priorities. These days ethics means mostly the study of right and wrong actions. But for the stoics or for the ancient Greco Romans in general, ethics had again a much broader meaning. It meant literally the study of how to live your life. So it's not just about whether a particular action is right or wrong. It's also about your motivations for carrying out a particular action. Are they good motivations or not good motivations? Uh is about your priorities in life. Your goals, the way you relate to other people and so on and so forth. The second discipline of action is connected with ethics. Action is about dealing

[10:08] with other people. Ethics is about how to live a life. Since we're social animal, the two are very closely related. We live a social life. We don't live on deserted islands. We we don't do very well when we are on our own. We can survive perhaps on our own under certain circumstances, but we only thrive in a society. When I say logic, most people start thinking about logical puzzles and paradoxes and things like that. And that's fine. That is part of it. But logic according to the Stoics is in general the study of good thinking. So it includes also what we would today call cognitive science. uh the understanding of cognitive biases and uh the the understanding of why people's thinking can go wrong one way or the other. So it's much broader than the technical field of logic. Ascent. Ascent is about refining our understanding and practice of the first two disciplines. In other words, it's about using good judgment and therefore it's about logic.

[11:08] It's about understanding how human reasoning works and also how it can go wrong so that we avoid as much as possible mistakes and we're trying to think as much as we we can in a rational reasonable way and then implement that kind of approach into daily life. One of the obvious questions that come up with stoicism is does it work? Which if you think about it on the one hand it's a little bit of a weird question because we're talking about a philosophy. We're not talking about, you know, a scientific approach to life as we understand it today. Um, very few people, for instance, would would ask the question, well, does Christianity work or does Buddhism work? However, they might ask, do prayers work or does meditation work? In other words, the techniques associated with certain religions or philosophies. In those cases, it does make sense to ask yourself, well, does it work? Is it is it something that quite int independently of the theoretical part of the philosophy does it actually have

[12:10] empirical evidence? So the f the same question can be asked reasonably about stoicism. We have a series of lines of evidence that stoic techniques the stoic approach to a good life does in fact work. The first one is that stoicism originated what is now known as cognitive behavioral therapy back in the 1960s in New York. Authors like Aaron Beck and Albert Ellis started to practice this type of psychotherapy which today is one of the best evidence-based type of psychotherapists and they started from stoicism. They both read Marcus Aurelius and Pictitus and other stoics and they thought oh these people were on to something here that there is something that can work that is very practical that can actually help people. Of course CBT as is known uh today went then through a series of changes and evolution over the last several decades. CBT is empirically based. There is lots of studies, empirical studies that show that it does work. So, it's not the same as asking whether stoicism work, but it's pretty close to asking whether

[13:10] stoic techniques work because a lot of the techniques uh that the ancient stoics designed and developed on the basis of their intuition about human psychology and human nature turns out are actually efficacious. So, that's one line of evidence that stoicism in a sense works. There is also a increasing number of papers out there on cognitive science in general. Not just cognitive behavioral therapy but cognitive science in general. How the brain works, how human decision making uh is carried out and so on and so forth. And my understanding is that much of that research is if not in direct support of stoic techniques, it certainly is compatible, highly compatible with it. For instance, modern psychologists and cognitive scientists have developed a theory of the relationship between reason and emotions that is very similar to the way in which the Stoics were thinking about the connection between reason and emotion. And then finally, there now begins to be

[14:11] direct studies about the efficacy of stoic techniques. Stoicism is popular enough that psychologists have begun to look into systematically into whether specifically stoic techniques work or don't. For instance, one of my colleagues, Tim Leon, who is a psychotherapist uh has just published recently one of the first papers that shows at least preliminary evidence that yes, indeed stoic techniques seem to have the kind of effects on behavior and on the way people think that the Stoics thought they should have. Stoicism is a philosophy of life and that if you think about it, it's a interesting concept. What is a philosophy of life in the first place? Do we need a philosophy of life? I encounter people that tell me that they don't need a philosophy of life. They just live their life. And I point out that that is a philosophy of life. U there is no way to live a life without a philosophy. That philosophy might not be conscious. It may not be the result of deliberations that you did with yourself, you know, paying

[15:12] attention to what you're doing and why. But if I observe your behavior, if I see what your choices are, your priorities, your values, and so on and so forth, I can put them all together and say, "Okay, this person's philosophy of life is this. It's the result of or it's whatever underpins their choices, their values, their priorities, and their behavior." So, we all have a philosophy of life. If that's true, well, we might as well then be conscious of it and and be aware of it and possibly even occasionally at least ask ourselves, well, is this a good philosophy of life or not? Do I need to change something? So, one might be tempted then to go to the opposite extreme and say, "Oh, if I need a philosophy of life, I'm going to pick one off the shelf. Here's Stoicism. I heard that it's a good thing. Let me pick stoism. From now on, I'm a stoic." And that's it. End of the story. But that is also dangerous in a sense because because now you're blindly following what somebody said 2,000 years ago or 2,300 years ago uh without necessarily thinking things through

[16:13] without saying asking yourself well is this thing actually make sense. Does it fit the way I want to live my life and if not why why not? So there is on the one hand a danger of not being aware of one's own philosophy of life. There's also the opposite danger of sort of taking something off the shelf without questioning, without exercising one's own critical judgment about whether that thing actually makes sense, is useful, works, etc. Well, then there is a third option. Some people say, "Oh, um, I'm going to build my own philosophy of life out of bits and pieces from different sources. So, I heard that stoism is useful. I'm going to take something from stoism. I heard that Epicurionism is useful. I'm going to take something from that." Some of my friends are Buddhists. Perhaps I could borrow something from Buddhist. That is certainly something that can be done. It's usually referred to as eclecticism. But it's also got its own problems because you might end up with a mishmash of things that don't make any sense when

[17:14] they're brought together. There is a reason why these philosophies are internally coherent and people have worked on them for thousands of years in order to make them internally coherent. uh for instance although the Stoics themselves acknowledged that there is something useful in Epicuranism and they actually uh incorporated aspects of Epicuranism into their philosophy. At the end of the day, one cannot be simultaneously a stoic and an Epicuran. Why not? Because the most important value for a stoic is one's own virtue, meaning one's own character. Pleasure is secondary. The most important value for an Epicurion is pleasure. One's character, one's virtues are actually only instrumental to a a life of pleasure. So at the end of the day, there may be situations where you had to choose. Is it going to be pleasure or is it going to be character? And if you choose one way, you're an impure. If you choose another way, you're a stoic, whether you're aware of it or not.

[18:15] In my own case, I think of myself as mostly a stoic, meaning that there are a number of things that in stoic philosophy as a whole that I think are very valuable. They're very well thought out and I have adopted them as at least a provisional way of navigating my own life. But I am also very much attracted by another ancient Greco Roman philosophy, skepticism, which has to do with the notion that we're fallible. We don't know the truth with a capital T. At best, we can make reasonable guesses, probabilistic guesses about what works or what doesn't work, what is true and what is not true. And we should therefore always be aware that no matter what we do, we may be mistaken. No matter what we think, we might be mistaken. So I temper my stoism with a little bit of skepticism. And in fact, I temper my stoic skepticism with uh a little bit of something that it's called philosophical pessimism. This is the notion that there are probably no

[19:18] grand narratives in the in the world. There is no universal plan. There is no uh end to history. There is no inevitable uh trajectory that we go either in our lives or as a society as a whole. It all it's all about things happening here and now. and there is no rhyme or reason to them. So I put all these things together into what to me feels like a reasonably coherent philosophy. It's not my invention and yet at the same time it's not exactly anything that you find specifically in any in any particular other other author. One thing that I would suggest for instance is certainly read the original texts but even that is not that simple because there are countless translations uh and sometimes if you read the same book in different translations it almost feels like a different book. Uh there are versions of Marcus Aurelius's meditations that really feel like a different book from some other translations. So one needs to be careful. The more recent translations

[20:20] the more modern translations are better. Uh some of my favorite for instance are by a classicist named Robin Waterfield who has translated both Marcus Aurelius and Epictitus. The University of Chicago Press has made a huge edition of all of the writings of Senica. Invest a little bit of money. After all, if we're talking about something that you want want to pursue as a philosophy of life, it's worth investing a few bucks to actually get it right or as right as possible. One of the advantages of these modern editions is that they have a lot of notes. And the notes will help you will guide you through understanding what exactly these people are are saying because they're putting those notions in their philosophical as well as historical context. But the other thing is I hear often uh people say, "Oh, I'm I'm just going to read the the story text. Forget all of these modern authors, including yours truly, who are writing about stoicism." I think that's a mistake. I mean that may come across as a self-serving mistake since

[21:20] as I said I'm one of those authors but nevertheless I think it is a mistake I myself took advantage of the writings of modern authors because again stoism is ancient it's 2300 almost 2400 years old it needs interpretation it needs updates and that interpretation those updates need to be done carefully by people who actually know what they're talking about so for instance I would pick up a book by my friends and colleagues Donald Robertson. Robertson is a cognitive behavioral therapist. That's his approach to stoicism. Bill Irvine is a classicist and so is John Sers. Those are some of the best modern stoic authors that you can trust. These are people who actually know what they're talking about and they all all of these authors have written very very accessible books that can be used to uh dig deeper into stoisism as a modern philosophy of life.

[22:22] Want to support the channel? Join the Big Think members community where you get access to videos early and free.
